Refinement-Based Verification for Possibly-Cyclic Lists⋆

                   Alexey Loginov1⋆⋆ , Thomas Reps2 , and Mooly Sagiv3
                    1
                   IBM T.J. Watson Research Center; alexey@us.ibm.com
               2
                 Comp. Sci. Dept., University of Wisconsin; reps@cs.wisc.edu
             3
               School of Comp. Sci., Tel-Aviv University; msagiv@post.tau.ac.il



       Abstract. In earlier work, we presented an abstraction-refinement mechanism
       that was successful in verifying automatically the partial correctness of in-situ
       list reversal when applied to an acyclic linked list [10]. This paper reports on the
       automatic verification of the total correctness (partial correctness and termina-
       tion) of the same list-reversal algorithm, when applied to a possibly-cyclic linked
       list. A key contribution that made this result possible is an extension of the finite-
       differencing technique [14] to enable the maintenance of reachability information
       for a restricted class of possibly-cyclic data structures, which includes possibly-
       cyclic linked lists.


1 Introduction
Reinhard Wilhelm has long been associated with the Dagstuhl Seminars on Computer
Science. In March of 2003, the Dagstuhl Seminar “Reasoning about Shape” was ded-
icated to one of the subjects that benefited from important contributions on the part of
Reinhard Wilhelm. During that seminar, Richard Bornat posed an interesting challenge
problem to the authors. The challenge concerns the application of the in-situ list rever-
sal procedure Reverse to a panhandle list, i.e., a linked list that contains a cycle but
in which at least the head of the list is not part of the cycle. (The lists shown in Fig. 1
are examples of panhandle lists.) Richard Bornat challenged us to use our techniques to
demonstrate that, when applied to a panhandle list, Reverse produces a list in which
the orientation of the successor edges in the panhandle (the acyclic part of the list) is
as it was in the input list, while the orientation of the successor edges on the cycle is
reversed.
    In [10], we presented an abstraction-refinement mechanism for use in static analy-
ses based on 3-valued logic [17], where the semantics of statements and the query of
interest are expressed using logical formulas. Our abstraction-refinement mechanism
introduces additional instrumentation relations (defined via logical formulas over core
relations, which capture the basic properties of memory configurations). Instrumenta-
tion relations record auxiliary information in a logical structure, thus providing a mech-
anism to fine-tune an abstraction: an instrumentation relation captures a property that
an individual memory cell may or may not possess. In general, the introduction of addi-
tional instrumentation relations refines an abstraction into one that is prepared to track
⋆
   Supported by ONR (N00014-01-1-{0708,0796}) and NSF (CCR-9986308                              and
   CCF-{0524051,0540955}).
⋆⋆
   The work was performed while Loginov was at the University of Wisconsin.
