                                           WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED
                                                       LOOP CONFIGURATIONS


                                                         SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


                                                 Abstract. Triangular fully packed loop configurations (TFPLs) emerged as
                                                 auxiliary objects in the study of fully packed loop configurations on a square
                                                 (FPLs) corresponding to link patterns with a large number of nested arches.
                                                 Wieland gyration, on the other hand, was invented to show the rotational
arXiv:1406.1657v1 [math.CO] 6 Jun 2014




                                                 invariance of the numbers Aπ of FPLs corresponding to a given link pattern
                                                 π. The focus of this article is the definition and study of Wieland gyration
                                                 on TFPLs. We show that the repeated application of this gyration eventually
                                                 leads to a configuration that is left invariant. We also provide a characteriza-
                                                 tion of such stable configurations. Finally we apply our gyration to the study
                                                 of TFPL configurations, in particular giving new and simple proofs of several
                                                 results.




                                                                               Introduction
                                            Triangular fully packed loop configurations (TFPLs) first appeared in the study
                                         of ordinary fully packed loop configurations (FPLs). There they were used to show
                                         that the number of FPLs corresponding to a given link pattern with m nested
                                         arches is a polynomial in m, see [3]. It soon turned out that TFPLs possess a
                                         number of nice properties, which made them worthy objects of study by themselves.
                                         For instance, they can be seen as a generalized model for Littlewood–Richardson
                                         coefficients, thereby establishing an unexpected link to algebra. This was first
                                         proven in [6] by a convoluted argument and later in [4] in a direct combinatorial
                                         manner and in a more general setting. Other combinatorial aspects of TFPLs,
                                         many of them still conjectural, are studied in [5, 8].
                                            In 2000 Wieland [9] invented the operation on FPLs which bears his name. The
                                         Wieland gyration was used to prove the rotational invariance of the numbers Aπ of
                                         FPLs corresponding to a given link pattern π. It was later heavily used by Cantini
                                         and Sportiello [2] to prove the Razumov–Stroganov conjecture. It also came up in
                                         connection with TFPLs already in [5] following work of [8].
                                             The main contribution of this article is the explicit definition of Wieland gyration
                                         for TFPLs together with a detailed study of some of its properties.
                                             While the usual Wieland gyration of FPLs is an involution, our left-Wieland
                                         gyration WL acting on TFPLs is not. By a finiteness argument, the sequence
                                         (WLm (f ))m≥0 is eventually periodic. In Theorem 3, it will be proven that the
                                         length of the period is always one, which means one always reaches a TFPL which
                                         is invariant under left-Wieland gyration. In fact, if N is the size of f , then less that
                                         2N iterations of WL will suffice to obtain such stable configurations. A key step
                                         in the proof of Theorem 3 is to classify these stable TFPLs. It turns out that this
                                         depends solely on the occurrence of a certain type of edges called drifters: this is
                                         the content of Theorem 4. These results also hold for right-Wieland gyration.
                                             Now to each TFPL are assigned three binary words u, v and w that encode
                                         its boundary conditions. Such binary words σ are naturally associated with Young
                                            Supported by the Austrian Science Foundation FWF, START grant Y463. PN was also sup-
                                         ported by the French Research Agency ANR, project ANR-11-JS02-001.
                                                                                        1
2                SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


diagrams λ(σ), and by the results of [6, 4], TFPLs with boundary (u, v; w) such that
|λ(u)| + |λ(v)| = |λ(w)| are enumerated by the Littlewood-Richardson-coefficient
cw
 u,v . We will show that such TFPLs are stable. In general, the boundary (u, v; w) of
a TFPL has to satisfy |λ(u)| + |λ(v)| ≤ |λ(w)|: this was proven in [8] using Wieland
gyration and a certain degree argument, and later reproven in a combinatorial
fashion in [4]. Here we will use left- and right-Wieland gyrations to give a simple
proof of this inequality.
   The paper is divided as follows. In Section 1 we recall the definition of FPLs
and TFPLs as well as elementary properties of binary words and Young diagrams.
Section 2 contains the definition of our main construction, the left-Wieland gyra-
tion acting on TFPLs, based on Wieland’s original definition. It is introduced in
Definition 2.1 and we give its first properties, culminating in Theorem 2. We can
then state the theorems about stability of TFPLs, namely Theorems 3 and 4, which
are proven in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 contains applications of our gyration to
enumerative questions concerning TFPLs.

                 1. Definitions and elementary properties
  In this section we recall the definitions of FPLs and TFPLs, and the binary
words attached to the boundary of a TFPL with the necessary conditions they
must satisfy.
1.1. Fully packed loop configurations. Fully packed loop configurations first
came up in statistical physics; they are an alternative representation of six-vertex
model configurations which are in one-to-one correspondence with square-ice con-
figurations, see for example [1] and [9]. Furthermore, they are in bijection with
alternating sign matrices and other combinatorial configurations, cf. [7].
   We start with the graph Gn , which is defined as the square grid with n2 vertices
together with 4n external edges. The (n + 1)2 unit squares of this grid, including
external cells that have two or three surrounding edges only, are said to be the cells
of Gn . They are partitioned into odd and even cells in a chessboard manner where
by convention the cells on the Northwest-Southeast diagonal are odd. In Figure 1
the graph G8 together with its odd and even cells is depicted.

                           o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o
                           e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e
                           o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o
                           e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e
                           o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o
                           e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e
                           o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o
                           e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e
                           o   e   o   e   o   e   o   e   o

              Figure 1. The graph G8 with its odd and even cells.

Definition 1.1. A fully packed loop configuration (FPL) of size n is a subgraph
F of Gn satisfying that
   (1) each vertex of Gn is incident to two edges of F , and
   (2) precisely every other external edge belongs to F .
   WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS                        3


   Given an FPL F a cell of F is defined as a cell of Gn together with those of its
surrounding edges that belong to F . An example of an FPL is given in Figure 2. In
a natural way, every FPL defines a non-crossing matching of the occupied external
edges – its so-called link pattern – by matching those which are joined by a path.




                                 Figure 2. A FPL of size 8.

   In the course of the study of FPLs corresponding to fixed link patterns with a
sufficiently large number of nested arches, TFPLs first occurred: such FPLs admit a
combinatorial decomposition, in which TFPLs naturally arise. This combinatorial
decomposition first came up in the course of the proof in [3] of a conjecture in [10]
stating that if we introduce m nested arches in a fixed link pattern π then the
number of FPLs corresponding to this link pattern is a polynomial function in m
as m varies.
1.2. Triangular fully packed loop configurations. To give the definition of
triangular fully packed loop configurations, we need the following graph:
Definition 1.2 (The graph GN ). Let N be a positive integer. The graph GN is
defined as the induced subgraph of the square grid made up of N consecutive centered
rows of 3, 5, . . . , 2N + 1 vertices from top to bottom together with 2N + 1 vertical
external edges incident to the 2N + 1 bottom vertices.

                                           L7           R1
                                                o   e
                                      L6                     R2
                                           o    e   o   e
                                 L5                               R3
                                      o    e    o   e   o    e
                            L4                                         R4
                                 o    e    o    e   o   e    o    e
                       L3                                                   R5
                            o    e    o    e    o   e   o    e    o    e
                  L2                                                             R6
                       o    e    o    e    o    e   o   e    o    e    o    e
             L1                                                                       R7
                  o    e    o    e    o    e    o   e   o    e    o    e    o    e

               Figure 3. The graph G7 with its odd and even cells.

   In the following, let LN = {L1 , L2 , . . . , LN } (resp. RN = {R1 , R2 , . . . , RN }) be
the set made up of the leftmost (resp. rightmost) vertices of the N rows of GN ,
where the vertices are numbered from left to right. Furthermore, the N (N + 1)
unit squares of GN , including external unit squares that have three surrounding
4                SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


edges only, are said to be the cells of GN . They are partitioned into odd and even
cells in a chessboard manner where by convention the top left cell of GN is odd. In
Figure 3 the graph G7 together with its odd and even cells is pictured.
Definition 1.3 ([4]). Let N be a positive integer. A triangular fully packed loop
configuration (TFPL) of size N is a subgraph f of GN such that:
     (i) Every other external edge starting with the second one belongs to f .
    (ii) The 2N vertices in LN ∪ RN have degree 0 or 1.
   (iii) All other vertices of GN have degree 2.
   (iv) A path in f neither connects two vertices of LN nor two vertices of RN .

                                          L7     R1
                                     L6               R2
                                L5                         R3
                           L4                                   R4
                      L3                                             R5
                 L2                                                       R6
            L1                                                                 R7


                                Figure 4. A TFPL of size 7.

   An example of a TFPL is given in Figure 4. Similar to FPLs, a cell of f is a
cell of GN together with those of its surrounding edges that belong to f . A cell is
called interior if it does not contain a vertex in LN ∪ RN .

  By binary words we refer to words σ = σ1 · · · σN where σi ∈ {0, 1} for each
1 ≤ i ≤ N . In the following, the number of occurrences of 1 (resp. 0) in a binary
word σ is denoted by |σ|1 (resp. |σ|0 ). To each TFPL of size N a triple of binary
words of length N is assigned as follows:
Definition 1.4. Let f be a TFPL of size N . The boundary of f is a triple (u, v; w)
of binary words of length N defined as follows:
    (1) ui = 1 if and only if Li ∈ LN has degree 1,
    (2) vi = 1 if and only if Ri ∈ RN has degree 0 and
    (3) wi = 1 if and only if the i-th external edge in f – counted from left to right
        – is connected by a path in f either with a vertex in LN or with an external
        edge to its left.
                                                                    w
   The set of all TFPLs with boundary (u, v; w) is denoted by Tu,v      and its cardi-
           w
nality by tu,v . For example, the triple (0101111, 0011111; 1101101) is the boundary
of the TFPL depicted in Figure 4. A triple (u, v; w) that is the boundary of a
TFPL has to fulfill certain necessary conditions. To formulate them the following
standard result is needed:
Proposition 1.5 ([6]). For given non-negative integers k and ` the following two
sets are in bijection:
     (i) the set of binary words σ satisfying |σ|0 = k and |σ|1 = ` and
    (ii) the set of Young diagrams fitting in the rectangle with k rows and ` columns.
   In Figure 5, an example for the bijection between binary words and Young
diagrams is given. The Young diagram corresponding to a binary word σ is denoted
        WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS                           5


by λ(σ). Furthermore, λ(τ ) ⊆ λ(σ) means that the Young diagram λ(τ ) is included
in the Young diagram λ(σ), and |λ(σ)| denotes the number of cells of the Young
diagram λ(σ). Note that |λ(σ)| coincides with the number of inversions of the
binary word σ.
Theorem 1 ([3, 8, 4]). In order for a TFPL configuration with boundary (u, v; w)
to exist, the following must be satisfied:
(1.1)                               |u|0 =|v|0 = |w|0 ,
(1.2)                         λ(u) ⊆ λ(w) and λ(v) ⊆ λ(w),
(1.3)                              |λ(u)|+|λ(v)| ≤ |λ(w)|.
   Conditions (1.1)and (1.2) are reasonably easy to prove. In Section 4, we will
provide a new proof of Condition (1.3) using Wieland gyration on TFPLs.

            1 1 1 1                    1 1 1 1 1                                           1
        0                          0                                                   0
    1                                                                            1 1
0                                  0                                         0
                                                                       1 1
                      u                               v                                        w

              Figure 5. The Young diagrams which correspond to the bound-
              ary (0101111, 0011111; 1101101) of the TFPL in Figure 4.

   To end this section, we need certain skew shapes which play an important role
in the context of left- and right-Wieland gyration. A skew shape is said to be a
horizontal strip ( resp. a vertical strip) if each of its columns (resp. rows) contains
at most one cell. Examples are given in Figure 6.
   Consider two binary words σ and τ satisfying |σ|1 = |τ |1 and |σ|0 = |τ |0 . Then
the skew shape λ(τ )/λ(σ) is a horizontal strip (resp. a vertical strip) if and only if
for each j ∈ {1, . . . , |σ|1 } the following holds: If σi is the j-th one ( resp. zero) in
σ, then τi−1 or τi ( resp. τi or τi+1 ) is the j-th one ( resp. zero) in τ .




              Figure 6. The horizontal strip λ(1111001100)/λ(0111100110)
              and the vertical strip λ(1100111100)/λ(1001111001).

        In the following, if the skew shaped Young diagram λ(τ )/λ(σ) is a horizontal
                                                  h                v
strip (resp. a vertical strip), we will write σ −→ τ (resp. σ −→ τ ).

                           2. Wieland gyration for TFPLs
   In this subsection the definitions of left- and right-Wieland gyration for TFPLs
are given and some first properties are derived. The starting point is the definition
of Wieland gyration for FPLs. It is composed of local operations on all active cells
of an FPL: the active cells of an FPL can be chosen to be either all its odd cells or
all its even cells.
   Now, let F be an FPL and c be an active cell of F . Then we must distinguish
two cases, namely whether c contains precisely two edges of F on opposite sides
or not. If this is the case, Wieland gyration W leaves c invariant. Otherwise, the
effect of W on c is that edges and non-edges of F are exchanged. In Figure 7, the
6                 SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


action of W on an active cell is illustrated. The result of applying W to each active
cell of F is said to be the image of F under Wieland gyration and is denoted by
W(F ).




    Figure 7. Up to rotation, the action of W on the active cells of an FPL.

   In Figure 8 the image of the FPL depicted in Figure 2 under Wieland gyration
with the odd cells being active is pictured.




                                           W




         Figure 8. The image of the FPL depicted in Figure 2 under
         Wieland gyration with the odd cells being active.

   Wieland gyration as it will be defined for TFPLs is based on the operation W.
As active cells of a TFPL can be chosen either all its odd cells or all its even cells.
Choosing all odd cells as active cells will lead to what will be defined as left-Wieland
gyration, whereas choosing all even cells as active cells will lead to what will be
defined as right-Wieland gyration.
Definition 2.1 (Left-Wieland gyration). Let f be a triangular fully packed loop
configuration with left boundary word u, and let u− be a binary word such that
      h
u− −→ u. The image of f under left-Wieland gyration with respect to u− is
determined as follows:
    (1) Insert a vertex L0i to the left of Li for 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Then run through the
        occurrences of ones in u− : Let {i1 < i2 < . . . < iN1 } = {i|u−i = 1}.
         (a) If uij is the j-th one in u, add a horizontal edge between L0ij and Lij .
         (b) If uij −1 is the j-th one in u, add a vertical edge between L0ij and Lij −1 .
    (2) Apply Wieland gyration to each odd cell of f .
    (3) Delete all vertices in RN and their incident edges.
After shifting the whole construction one unit to the right, one obtains the desired
image WLu− (f ).
  In the case u− = u, we will simply write WL(f ) and speak of the image of f
under left-Wieland gyration.
   WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS                               7


                                                  L7    R1
                                            L6                R2
                                      L5                            R3
                                L4                                        R4
                          L3                                                    R5
                    L2                                                                R6
              L1                                                                            R7




                                                  L07   R10
                                            L06               R20
                                      L05                           R30
                                L04                                       R40
                          L03                                                   R50
                    L02                                                               R60
              L01                                                                           R70


         Figure 9. The TFPL depicted in Figure 4 and its image under
         left-Wieland gyration with respect to 0011111.

    In the following, to distinguish between vertices in f and in WLu− (f ) the fol-
lowing notation is chosen: when regarding the image under left-Wieland gyration
with respect to u− , we will write x0 for each vertex x of GN (before the shifting is
performed).
    In Figure 9 the TFPL depicted in Figure 4 with its odd cells marked by gray discs
and its image under left-Wieland gyration with respect to 0011111 are pictured. It
is a TFPL with boundary (0011111, 0101111; 1101101). Note that the left boundary
                                                                                h
of the TFPL pictured in Figure 4 is 0101111 and 0011111 −→ 0101111. Also, the
new right boundary 0101111 and the right boundary 0011111 of the preimage satisfy
              v
that 0011111 −→ 0101111. This turns out to hold in general:
Proposition 2.2. Let f be a TFPL with boundary (u, v; w) and let u− be a binary
                           h
word satisfying u− −→ u. Then WLu− (f ) is a TFPL with boundary (u− , v + ; w)
                                         v
where v + is a binary word satisfying v −→ v + .
Proof. First, we have to check that WLu− (f ) indeed is a TFPL, i.e. the four condi-
tions in Definition 1.3 must be satisfied. By definition, the vertices L01 , L02 , . . . , L0N
have degree 0 or 1. For the degree of Ri0 to be 2 in WLu− (f ), the vertex to the
left of Ri would need to be adjacent both to Ri−1 and Ri in f , which is excluded
since no path in f joins two vertices in RN by Definition 1.3(iv). Thus, the vertices
R10 , R20 , . . . , RN
                     0
                       have degree 0 or 1 in WLu− (f ). All other vertices have degree 2 in
WLu− (f ) since they simply come from the application of W to cells of f . Finally let
f 0 denote the configuration that is obtained before the vertices of RN are deleted.
8                 SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


Since Wieland gyration preserves the connectivity of path endpoints in each active
cell, this is also true in f 0 . Thus, a path in WLu− (f ) neither joins two vertices in
LN 0 nor two vertices in RN 0 and Definition 1.3(iv) is satisfied.
   It remains to check the assertion on the boundary. The left boundary of WLu− (f )
                                                                              v
is u− by construction. The right boundary v + of WLu− (f ) satisfies v −→ v + by
Proposition 2.4 below and the characterization of pairs σ, σ + of binary words satis-
           v
fying σ −→ σ + at the end of Section 1. Finally, the bottom boundary of WLu− (f )
is w because Wieland gyration preserves the connectivity of path endpoints in each
active cell.                                                                          
  The lemma below treats the effects of left-Wieland gyration along the right
boundary of a TFPL.
Lemma 2.3. Let f, u− , v + be as in Proposition 2.2. Then v + 6= v if and only if
there exists a vertex in RN which is incident to a vertical edge of f .
Proof. We denote by xs the vertex to the left of Rs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ N , and write f 0
to denote WLu− (f ).
    Let f be a TFPL with a vertex Rj incident to a vertical edge, and pick j minimal.
Then xj is necessarily adjacent both to the vertex to its left and to the vertex below,
so by Wieland gyration Rj0 is of degree 0 in f 0 . Since Rj is of degree 1 this shows
v 6= v + .
    Conversely, suppose that v + 6= v. By Proposition 2.2 there exists necessarily
j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 1} such that vj = 0 and vj+ = 1. Rj0 is of degree 0 in f 0 , so xj is
adjacent in f both to the vertex to its left and to the vertex below it. Since Rj is
of degree 1, it is necessarily incident to a vertical edge.                               
  As a byproduct of the previous proof, one can in fact precisely describe the right
boundary v + as follows:
Proposition 2.4. Conserve the hypotheses of Lemma 2.3. For each i such that
Ri is adjacent to a horizontal edge ( resp. a vertical edge) then vi+ = 0 ( resp.
 +
vi+1 = 0). All other values vj+ ’s are equal to 1.
Right-Wieland gyration. In the definition of left-Wieland gyration, the active
cells are all odd cells of a TFPL. When selecting all even cells of a TFPL as active
cells, right-Wieland gyration is obtained. It depends on a binary word v − satisfying
      v
v − −→ v that encodes what happens along the right boundary of a TFPL with
right boundary v and is denoted by WRv− repsectively WR if v − = v. It is defined
in an obvious way as the symmetric version of left gyration, and we shall simply
illustrate it on an example in Figure 10.
    There are immediate symmetrical versions of Propositions 2.2 and 2.4 for WR
which we record:
Proposition 2.5. The image of a TFPL with boundary (u, v; w) under right-
Wieland gyration with respect to v − is a TFPL with boundary (u+ , v − ; w) where
                                      h
u+ is a binary word satisfying u −→ u+ .
Proposition 2.6. Keep the notations of the previous proposition. For each index
i such that Li is adjacent to a horizontal edge ( resp. a vertical edge), there holds
u+               +                           +
  i = 1 ( resp. ui−1 = 1). All other values uj ’s are equal to 0.

   Given a TFPL with right boundary v, the effect of left-Wieland gyration along
the right boundary of the TFPL is inverted by right-Wieland gyration with respect
to v. On the other hand, given a TFPL with left boundary u the effect of right-
Wieland gyration along the left boundary is inverted by left-Wieland gyration with
respect to u. Since Wieland gyration is an involution on each cell, it follows:
  WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS                                9

                                                L7      R1
                                          L6                  R2
                                    L5                              R3
                              L4                                          R4
                        L3                                                      R5
                  L2                                                                  R6
            L1                                                                              R7




                                                L07     R10
                                          L06                 R20
                                    L05                             R30
                              L04                                         R40
                        L03                                                     R50
                  L02                                                                 R60
            L01                                                                             R70


        Figure 10. A TFPL and its image under right-Wieland gyration
        with respect to 0011111.

Theorem 2.          (1) Let f be a TFPL with boundary (u+ , v; w) and u be a binary
                                    h
        word such that u −→ u+ . Then
                                          WRv (WLu (f )) = f.
   (2) Let f be a TFPL with boundary (u, v + ; w) and v be a binary word such that
          v
       v −→ v + . Then
                             WLu (WRv (f )) = f.
Remark 2.7. It is perhaps useful to point out that WR(WL(f )) 6= f in general.
Indeed by Lemma 2.3 equality will hold precisely when all vertices Ri of degree one
are adjacent to horizontal edges.
   In Section 3, we will study the behaviour of TFPLs under iterated applications
of WL. In Figure 11, an example of a TFPL to which left-Wieland gyration is
repeatedly applied is depicted: one checks that the last TFPL in the sequence is
invariant by left-Wieland gyration. In the following, a TFPL that is invariant under
left-Wieland gyration is said to be stable.
   Given a TFPL f , the sequence (WLm (f ))m≥0 is eventually periodic since there
are only finitely many TFPLs of a fixed size. The length of this period is in fact
always 1.
Theorem 3. Let f be a TFPL of size N . Then WL2N −1 (f ) is stable, so that the
following holds for all m ≥ 2N − 1 :
                                        WLm (f ) = WL2N −1 (f ).
10                 SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU




                                     WL




     WL                                      WL




     Figure 11. A TFPL to which left-Wieland gyration is repeatedly applied.

The same holds for right-Wieland gyration.
    For that purpose, it is necessary to characterize TFPLs that are invariant under
left-Wieland gyration. Note that a TFPL is invariant under left-Wieland gyration
if and only if it is invariant under right-Wieland gyration by Theorem 2.

                                 3. Stable TFPLs
    From now on the vertices of GN are partitioned into odd and even vertices in
a chessboard manner such that by convention the vertices in LN are odd. In our
pictures, the odd vertices are depicted by circles and the even vertices by squares.
An example of a TFPL where the partition of its vertices into odd and even vertices
is indicated is depicted in Figure 12.




          Figure 12. The bottom right TFPL configuration of size 7 in
          Figure 11 with its odd resp. even vertices illustrated by circles
          resp. squares.

     It will be proven that stable TFPLs can be characterized as follows:

Theorem 4. A TFPL is stable if and only if it contains no edge of the form .

     The TFPL depicted in Figure 12 is stable by Theorem 4.

Definition 3.1. An edge of the form       is called a drifter.

   In the following, the possible cells of a TFPL play an important role in the
proofs. For convenience, notations for the 16 odd and 16 even cells of a TFPL are
fixed. In Figure 13 the chosen notation can be seen.
   WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS 11



           o1        o2       o3        o4            o5    o6       o7        o8



           o9       o10       o11       o12       o13       o14      o15       o16




           e1        e2        e3       e4            e5    e6       e7        e8



           e9       e10       e11       e12           e13   e14      e15       e16

         Figure 13. The notations for the 16 odd and 16 even cells of a
         TFPL, with emphasis on the subsets O = {o1 , o2 , o3 , o4 , o5 } and
         E = {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 , e5 }.


3.1. Characterization of stable TFPLs. To prove Theorem 4, we will begin by
showing that a TFPL containing a drifter is not stable.
Proposition 3.2. Let f be a TFPL that contains a drifter. Then WL(f ) 6= f .
Proof. If f contains a drifter incident to a vertex in RN , then by Lemma 2.3 we
know that the right boundaries of f and WL(f ) are different, so that necessarily
WL(f ) 6= f .
   We can now assume that no vertex in RN is incident to a drifter. Let ι be
a drifter in f with maximal x-coordinate, and consider the odd cell o in f that
contains ι. Let x be the top right vertex of o and y be the bottom right vertex of
o. By the choice of ι the vertices x and y are not incident to a drifter.
                                                  x
                                         ι    o
                                                  y

Therefore, o ∈ {o8 , o9 , o10 , o11 , o12 }. If o is of the form o8 or o10 the vertex to the
right of x0 is incident to a drifter in WL(f ). In that case, WL(f ) 6= f because the
vertex to the right of x in f is not incident to a drifter by assumption. If o is of
the form o9 , o11 or o12 , the vertices x0 and y 0 are not adjacent in WL(f ). Thus,
WL(f ) 6= f because x and y are adjacent in f .                                           

  To prove that a TFPL without a drifter is indeed stable, we need to deter-
mine the types of cells which may occur. Define O = {o1 , o2 , o3 , o4 , o5 } and
E = {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 , e5 }.
Lemma 3.3. If f is a TFPL without drifters, then all interior odd cells belong to
O while all of its interior even cells belong to E.
Proof. Let f be a TFPL without a drifter, and o be one of its interior odd cells.
Since o has no drifter, it can only belong to O or have one of the types o6 , o7 or
o13 . But in types o6 , o13 (resp. o7 , o13 ), there would exist an interior cell above o (
resp. below o) that contains a drifter, what is excluded.
   The case of even cells is entirely analogous.                                         

   Furthermore, in a TFPL with no drifter each odd cell has a uniquely determined
even cell to its right.
12                SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


Lemma 3.4. Let f be a TFPL without drifters, o an odd cell of f and e the even
cell of f to the right of o. If o and e are interior, then they can only occur as part
of one of the following pairs:
          o1 e5           o2 e3           o3 e2            o4 e4           o5 e1

On the other hand, if o or e contains an external edge, then o and e can only occur
as part of one of the following pairs:


Proof. Here, only the case when o is an interior odd cell and o = o1 is considered,
the other cases being similar. Obviously, the cell e cannot equal e4 . But it cannot
equal e1 , e2 or e3 either, since otherwise one of the right vertices of o would be
be incident to a drifter. The only remaining possibility is that e is of type e5 by
Lemma 3.3.                                                                        
   We can now complete the proof of Theorem 4 by showing that a TFPL without
drifters is invariant under left-Wieland gyration.
Proposition 3.5. If f is a TFPL without drifters, then WL(f ) = f .
Proof. Let o be an odd cell of f and e be the even cell to its right. By Lemma 3.4,
e is uniquely determined by o. The crucial observation is that e coincides with the
image of o under Wieland gyration. Thus, each even cell of f and its corresponding
even cell of WL(f ) coincide. By definition all edges and non-edges of f incident to a
vertex in LN are preserved by left-Wieland gyration. In summary, WL(f ) = f . 
3.2. TFPLs are eventually stable under Wieland gyration. In this section,
we will prove Theorem 3. The idea of the proof is the following: when applying
left-Wieland gyration to a TFPL, the drifters of the TFPL are globally moved to
the right. Thus, after a finite number of applications of left-Wieland gyration,
all drifters eventually disappear through the right boundary. As a consequence of
Theorem 4 a stable TFPL is then obtained.
   In a TFPL of size N , there are 2N + 1 columns of vertices which we label from
left to right from 1 to 2N + 1.
Proposition 3.6. Let f be a TFPL of size N that contains a drifter in the n-th
column but no drifter in the columns 1, . . . , n − 1 to its left. Then WL(f ) contains
no drifter in any of the columns 1, . . . , n.
Proof. First of all, notice that by the definition of left-Wieland gyration, there is no
vertex of LN 0 incident to a drifter in WL(f ). By definition of WL, the occurrence
of a drifter in an even cell e0 of WL(f ) depends solely on the odd cell to the left of
the corresponding even cell e in f . By hypothesis, no odd cell of f occurring to the
left of the (n − 1)-st column has a vertex incident to a drifter. It follows from the
proof of Lemma 3.3 that all these odd cells belong to O. This entails that all even
cells of WL(f ) to the left of the n-th column belong to E, and thus do not contain
a drifter. Since these even cells cover all vertical edges in the columns 1, . . . , n, the
proof is complete.                                                                       
Proof of Theorem 3. By immediate induction on the result of Proposition 3.6, we
know that the configuration WL2N +1−n (f ) contains no drifter, and thus by Theo-
rem 4 it is stable under WL, so that
(3.1)                          WLm (f ) = WL2N +1−n (f )
for all m ≥ 2N + 1 − n. Since the first column of vertices of a TFPL consists only
of the vertex L1 , we have n ≥ 2, which proves the theorem.                     
  WIELAND GYRATION FOR TRIANGULAR FULLY PACKED LOOP CONFIGURATIONS 13


              4. Applications of Wieland gyration on TFPLs
4.1. Some linear relations. The following was conjectured for Dyck words in [8]
and proved in [5] using Wieland gyration on FPLs.
Proposition 4.1. Let u, v and w be binary words. Then
                          X               X
                                tw
                                 u+ ,v =         tw
                                                  u,v + .
                                h                  v
                          u+ :u−→u+          v + :v −→v +

Proof. Indeed the function WLu (·) acts on all TFPLs with boundary (u+ , v; w),
while WRv (·) acts on TFPLs with boundary (u, v − ; w). By Theorem 2, these
functions are inverse of one another, and the result is obtained by taking cardinal-
ities.                                                                            
4.2. The inequality (1.3). This states that |λ(u)| + |λ(v)| ≤ |λ(w)| always holds
for the boundaries (u, v; w) of TFPLs. It was given in [8, Lemma 3.7] in the
Dyck word case. Later, another proof in connection with TFPLs together with an
orientation of the edges was given in [4]. More precisely, it was shown there that
in an oriented TFPL with boundary (u, v; w), the quantity |λ(w)| − |λ(u)| − |λ(v)|
counts occurrences of certain local patterns in the TFPL.
   We now give an independent proof based on the properties of Wieland gyration;
the idea for this proof comes from the original one by Thapper, which can be seen
as relying on Wieland gyration on FPLs in an indirect way.
Proof of (1.3). Let f be a TFPL with boundary (u, v; w). The proof is done by
induction on |λ(u)|. In the case when |λ(u)| = 0 we have λ(v) ⊆ λ(w) by Equa-
tion (1.2), which implies |λ(v)| ≤ |λ(w)|.
   Assume now |λ(u)| ≥ 1. By removing a corner of λ(u), there exists a Young
diagram λ(u− ) ⊆ λ(u) with one cell less than λ(u). In particular λ(u)/λ(u− ) is a
horizontal strip.
   We first want to prove that there exists i > 0 such that WLiu− (f ) has right
boundary v + 6= v. Assume the contrary, that is the right boundary of WLiu− (f )
is v for all i > 0. Since there are only a finite number of TFPLs with boundary
(u− , v; w), there exist integers i0 , p > 0 such that
                              WLiu0−+p (f ) = WLiu0− (f ).
We can then apply WRiv0 to both sides of the identity, and by Theorem 2 we obtain
WLpu− (f ) = f . But these configurations have left boundaries u, u− respectively and
we assumed u− 6= u, which is a contradiction.
  Hence, let i be a positive integer such that WLiu− (f ) has boundary (u− , v + ; w)
where v + 6= v. By Proposition 2.2 we have λ(v) ( λ(v + ) and therefore |λ(v)| + 1 ≤ |λ(v + )|.
Applying the induction hypothesis to WLiu− (f ) completes the proof:
        |λ(u)| + |λ(v)| = |λ(u− )| + 1 + |λ(v)| ≤ |λ(u− )| + |λ(v + )| ≤ |λ(w)|.
                                                                                     
4.3. Excesses 0, 1 and beyond. For a TFPL with boundary (u, v; w), the non-
negative integer |λ(w)| − |λ(u)| − |λ(v)| is called the excess of f .
Proposition 4.2. If a TFPL has excess 0, then it is stable.
Proof. It is a consequence of [4, Proposition 5.2] that TFPLs of excess 0 do not
contain drifters, so we can conclude with Theorem 4.                          
   These TFPLs are known to be counted by Littlewood–Richardson coefficients [6,
4] as recalled in the introduction.
14                  SABINE BEIL, ILSE FISCHER, AND PHILIPPE NADEAU


   In [4], configurations of excess 1 were also studied in some detail and enumerated.
The authors defined a number of moves on such (oriented) configurations in order
to transform them, and ultimately reach a configuration of excess 0. It turns out
that these complicated moves are essentially equivalent to a simple application of
WL, at least when the configuration is not stable.
   Therefore stable configurations should first be studied and enumerated, and other
configurations may then be related to them through Wieland gyration, in order to
find for instance linear relations between their cardinalities. The feasibility of such
an approach is in particular supported by Theorem 3.

                                         References
 [1] M. T. Batchelor, H. W. J. Blöte, B. Nienhuis, and C. M. Yung. Critical behaviour of the fully
     packed loop model on the square lattice. J. Phys. A, 29:L399–L404, 1996.
 [2] L. Cantini and A. Sportiello. Proof of the Razumov- Stroganov conjecture. J. Combin. The-
     ory, Ser. A, 118(5):1549–1574, 2011.
 [3] F. Caselli, C. Krattenthaler, B. Lass, and P. Nadeau. On the number of fully packed loop
     configurations with a fixed associated matching. Elect. J. Comb., 11(2), 2004.
 [4] I. Fischer and P. Nadeau. Fully Packed Loops in a triangle: matchings, paths and puzzles.
     arXiv:1209.1262, 2012 (accepted in J . Combin. Theory, Ser. A).
 [5] P. Nadeau. Fully Packed Loop configurations in a Triangle. J. Combin. Theory, Ser. A,
     120(8):2164–2188, 2013.
 [6] P. Nadeau. Fully Packed Loop configurations in a Triangle and Littlewood-Richardson coef-
     ficients. J. Combin. Theory, Ser. A, 120(8):2137–2147, 2013.
 [7] J. Propp. The many faces of alternating-sign matrices. In Discrete models: combinatorics,
     computation, and geometry (Paris, 2001), Discrete Math. Theor. Comput. Sci. Proc., AA,
     pages 043–058 (electronic). Maison Inform. Math. Discrèt. (MIMD), Paris, 2001.
 [8] J. Thapper. Refined counting of fully packed loop configurations. Séminaire Lotharingien de
     Combinatoire, 56:B56e:27, 2007.
 [9] B. Wieland. A large dihedral symmetry of the set of alternating sign matrices. Elect. J.
     Comb., 7(1-3), 2000.
[10] J.-B. Zuber. On the counting of Fully Packed Loop Configurations: Some new conjectures.
     Elect. J. Comb., 11(1), 2004.

   Sabine Beil, Universität Wien, Fakultät für Mathematik, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1,
1090 Wien, Austria
   E-mail address: sabine.beil@univie.ac.at

   Ilse Fischer, Universität Wien, Fakultät für Mathematik, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1,
1090 Wien, Austria
   E-mail address: ilse.fischer@univie.ac.at

   Philippe Nadeau, CNRS, Institut Camille Jordan, Université Lyon 1, 43 boulevard
du 11 novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne cedex, France
   E-mail address: nadeau@math.univ-lyon1.fr
