                                              THE MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN A TRIANGULAR-GRID
                                                   BILLIARDS SYSTEM WITH A GIVEN PERIMETER

                                                                                          HONGLIN ZHU
arXiv:2309.00100v3 [math.CO] 21 Apr 2024




                                                  Abstract. Given a grid polygon P in a grid of equilateral triangles, Defant and Jiradilok
                                                  considered a billiards system where beams of light bounce around inside P . We study the
                                                  relationship between the perimeter perim(P ) of P and the number of different trajectories
                                                  cyc(P ) that the billiards system has. Resolving a conjecture of Defant and Jiradilok, we
                                                  prove the sharp inequality cyc(P ) ≤ (perim(P ) + 2)/4 and characterize the equality cases.




                                                                                     1. Introduction
                                              Equip the plane with a lattice of equilateral triangles of side length one, oriented so that
                                           some of the grid lines are horizontal. Following Defant and Jiradilok [7], we refer to the sides
                                           of the grid cells as panes. Define a grid polygon to be a simple polygon (i.e., homeomorphic
                                           to a disk) whose boundary is a union of panes.
                                              Let P be a grid polygon (not necessarily convex) with boundary panes b1 , . . . , bn listed
                                           clockwise. For any boundary pane bi , emit a laser beam from the midpoint of bi into the
                                           interior of P so that it forms a 60◦ angle with bi . The direction depends on the orientation of
                                           bi (viewed as a unit vector going from the endpoint adjacent to bi−1 to the endpoint adjacent
                                           to bi+1 ) and makes either a 60◦ angle, a 180◦ angle, or a 300◦ angle with the positive x-
                                           axis (see Figure 1). The light beam travels through the interior of P until reaching the
                                           midpoint of another boundary pane bj , meeting it at a 60◦ angle. This defines a permutation
                                           π : [n] → [n] where the light from the midpoint of bi hits the midpoint of bπ(i) . Defant and
                                           Jiradilok call π the billiards permutation of P .

                                                                                b1          b2
                                                                     b10                              b3


                                                                      b9                                   b4


                                                                           b8                              b5

                                                                                     b7          b6

                                                  Figure 1. A grid polygon with 10 boundary panes. The billiards permutation
                                                  of this polygon is (1 6 4 9) (2 5 8) (3 10 7).
                                                                                                 1
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                              2

   The billiards permutation can be interpreted as a “billiards process” as follows. Imagine
that the boundary panes of P are mirrors and that all other panes in the lattice are trans-
parent. When the light beam from bi reaches bπ(i) , it reflects off the mirror so that the beam
forms a 60◦ angle with bπ(i) . This reflected beam will subsequently travel to bπ2 (i) and so on
until eventually coming back to bi . Then the cycles in π correspond precisely to the different
trajectories of beams of light. In particular, observe that each i ∈ [n] appears in exactly one
cycle, and each cycle has length at least 3.
   Much of previous work on billiards in planar regions comes from the fields of dynamical
systems and recreational mathematics, where beams of light could have arbitrary initial
positions and directions [4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15]. In contrast, Defant and Jiradilok’s [7]
framework imposes much greater rigidity. While doing so renders many dynamical system
problems trivial or uninteresting, it also gives rise to many new and fascinating combinatorial
and geometric questions.
   More broadly, there has been increasing interest to study combinatorial objects through
a dynamical system setup [1, 2, 3, 7]. These recent works form a nascent subfield within
dynamical algebraic combinatorics, dubbed “combinatorial billiards” by [1].
   In this paper, we are interested in the relationship between the following quantities asso-
ciated to a grid polygon P :
      • the perimeter of P , denoted perim(P ), which is the number of boundary panes of P ,
        and
      • the number of cycles in the associated permutation πP , denoted cyc(P ), which is also
        the number of different light beam trajectories in the associated billiards system of
        P.
   As in [7], we say that a grid polygon is primitive if there is no interior pane that cuts
the polygon into two disconnected regions. Defant and Jiradilok proved the following upper
bound on cyc(P ) in terms of perim(P ).
Theorem 1.1 ([7], Theorem 1.2). If P is a simple grid polygon, then
                                                       
                                      2               3
                           cyc(P ) ≤     perim(P ) +      .
                                      7               2
  They noted that this inequality is not tight, and conjectured that cyc(P ) ≤ 14 (perim(P ) +
2). We prove this conjecture and give a partial characterization of the equality cases.
Theorem 1.2. If P is a simple grid polygon, then
                                             perim(P ) + 2
                                   cyc(P ) ≤               .
                                                  4
Furthermore, if P is primitive, then
                                             perim(P ) + 2
                                   cyc(P ) =
                                                   4
if and only if the billiards permutation of P contains exactly two 3-cycles and no cycles of
length greater than 4.
   Defant and Jiradilok [7] observed that an infinite family of equality cases exists, given by
trees of unit hexagons. Furthermore, Defant and Jiradilok1 also found an infinite family of
  1Private communications.
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                             3




       Figure 2. Take a rhombus of side length k + 2 and cut off the two antipodal
       unit triangles. The resulting grid polygon contains exactly two 3-cycles and k
       4-cycles. The figure is the case k = 2.

simple primitive grid polygon whose billiards permutation contains exactly two 3-cycles and
k 4-cycles, for each k ≥ 0 (see Figure 2). In fact, for each p ≥ 3, we can easily extend this
construction to obtain a simple primitive grid polygon P with perim(P ) = p and
                                                      
                                                 p+2
                                    cyc(P ) =            .
                                                   4
In particular, for p = 4k, simply take a rhombus of side length k. The resulting grid polygon
has k 4-cycles. For p = 4k + 1, take a rhombus of side length k + 1 and cut off a triangle
of side length 1 on the top and a triangle of side length 2 on the bottom. The resulting
grid polygon has one 3-cycle, one 6-cycle, and k − 2 4-cycles (for k = 1 there is just a single
5-cycle). For p = 4k + 3, take a rhombus of side length k + 1 and cut off the top unit triangle.
Then the resulting grid polygon has one 3-cycle and k 4-cycles.
   Defant and Jiradilok’s setup has an equivalent formulation in terms of Postnikov’s plabic
graphs introduced in [14]. Defant and Jiradilok’s original motivation for considering the
triangular-grid billiards problem was to better understand a class of plabic graphs. For
details on how plabic graphs are related to our problem, see [7]. For more background on
plabic graphs, see [14].
   Lam and Postnikov [13] recently introduced combinatorial objects called membranes,
which are dual to plabic graphs. In particular, minimal membranes of type A2 (we re-
call their definition in §2) can be viewed as a generalization of the class of grid polygons. We
will prove Theorem 1.2 by proving an analogous inequality for a class of minimal membranes
of type A2 we call generalized grid polygons.
   The paper is organized as follows. In §2, we introduce generalized grid polygons and build
the necessary infrastructure around them. The main reason we consider them is that we
would like to “drop” a cycle from the billiards permutation of a grid polygon (see Theo-
rem 2.5), and doing so may result in a polygon that is no longer simple. In §3, we prove
the generalization of Theorem 1.2 for generalized grid polygons. In §4, we discuss future
directions and open problems.
Acknowledgements. This work was done at the University of Minnesota Duluth with sup-
port from Jane Street Capital, the National Security Agency, and the CYAN Undergraduate
Mathematics Fund at MIT. The author thanks Joe Gallian and Colin Defant for organizing
the Duluth REU and providing this great research opportunity. We thank Mitchell Lee for
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                             4

detailed discussions and comments that significantly improved this paper. We thank Evan
Chen for making the observation that led to Theorem 2.5, Maya Sankar for suggesting the
use of simplicial complexes, and Colin Defant and Pakawut Jiradilok for providing comments.

                                     2. Preliminaries
  To prove Theorem 1.2, we will deal with polygons that are not simple. Thus, we need
to formalize and extend the definition of grid polygons. In particular, we would like to
include polygons that can overlap with themselves in certain ways. Intuitively, we can view
our generalized polygon as an object obtained by gluing unit triangles together in a well-
behaved way. To make this precise, we use the concept of simplicial complexes.
Definition 2.1 ([16]). A simplicial complex X consists of a set of vertices and a set of finite
nonempty subsets of vertices called simplices such that:
      • any set consisting of exactly one vertex is a simplex, and
      • any nonempty subset of a simplex is a simplex.
   A simplex containing exactly d + 1 vertices is a d-simplex, and we say the dimension of
such a simplex is d. The dimension of a simplicial complex X is the largest dimension of any
simplex of X. A d-dimensional simplicial complex X is homogeneous if every simplex in X
is a face (a subset) of some d-dimensional simplex in X.
   For two simplicial complexes X1 and X2 , a simplicial map f : X1 → X2 is a function from
the vertices of X1 to the vertices of X2 such that the image of any simplex is a simplex.
  For more on simplicial complexes, refer to textbooks on algebraic topology (e.g. [16]).
Observe that there is a natural way to view the triangular grid on the plane as a two-
dimensional homogeneous simplicial complex, where the vertices are the grid points, the
1-simplices are the panes, and the 2-simplices are the unit grid triangles. Call this simplicial
complex T .
Definition 2.2. A generalized grid polygon is a finite simply-connected homogeneous sim-
plicial complex X of dimension 2 together with a simplicial map to the triangular grid
f : X → T such that:
    (1) the geometric realization of X is a wedge of disks along boundary points;
    (2) each simplex in X is mapped by f to a simplex of the same dimension in T ;
    (3) each interior vertex is contained in exactly six 2-simplices; and
    (4) each 1-simplex that is not on the boundary of X is contained in exactly two 2-
        simplices, whose images under f form a diamond.
  In particular, observe that simple grid polygons can be viewed as generalized grid polygons.
See Figures 3 to 6 for some non-examples and examples of generalized grid polygons. For two
generalized grid polygons X and Y with simplicial maps f and g and boundary vertices x ∈ X
and y ∈ Y , the wedge X ∧ Y of X and Y is a generalized grid polygon which is the wedge of
the simplicial complexes X and Y at basepoints x and y, with simplicial map h : X ∧ Y → T
such that for any z ∈ X, h(z) = f (z) and for any w ∈ Y , h(w) = g(w) − g(y) + f (x).
  We call a generalized grid polygon indecomposable if it is not the wedge of any two gen-
eralized grid polygons and decomposable otherwise. Note that a generalized grid polygon is
indecomposable if and only if it is homeomorphic to a disk. A decomposable generalized grid
                 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                           5




                                        1     f          1, 2


                                        2




       Figure 3. A simplicial complex whose simplicial map violates Definition 2.2
       (4). Intuitively, we do not want “folding” to happen.




       Figure 4. A simplicial complex which violates Definition 2.2 (3) and has no
       simplicial map to the triangular grid.



                           12   1
                      11            2                           2, 8
                                                       1, 7             3, 9
                  10                    3    f

                  9                     4
                                                       6, 12            4, 10
                       8            5                           5, 11
                           7    6




       Figure 5. A simplicial complex which has a simplicial map to the triangular
       grid but violates Definition 2.2 (3).

polygon is the wedge of some indecomposable generalized grid polygons along boundary ver-
tices, which we call its components. Furthermore, a component is an outermost component
if it is wedged to the rest of the generalized grid polygon at a single point. Consider the
graph whose vertices are the components, with an edge between any two components that
are wedged together. This graph is a tree by the simply-connectedness of a generalized grid
polygon, and its leaves are the outermost components. We denote by comps(P ) the number
of components of a generalized grid polygon P .
   For a 1-simplex on the boundary of a generalized grid polygon, we view its image (a pane
in the triangular grid) as a vector placed at the pane and oriented so that its right side is
                   MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                            6


                                                     10       8                          12   11
                   16                  12       11        9       7       16                       10

                        15
                             14
                                  13
                                                                      f        15
                                                                                    14
                                                                                         13   1
                                                                                                   2,9
                                                                                                         3,8
                                            1                                                 6          4,7
                                       6        2                                                  5
                                       5        3
                                            4



       Figure 6. A valid generalized polygon. There are 5 components. Observe
       that f maps the simplicial complex to the triangular grid in a way that overlaps
       some 2-simplices.


the interior of the polygon. We say that (b1 , . . . , bn ) is a loop of panes if each bi is a pane in
the triangular grid and the head of bi is at the tail of bi+1 (indices taken modulo n). Note
that the image of the boundary of a generalized grid polygon under the map f given in
Definition 2.2 is a loop of panes which can be taken to wind clockwise around the image of
each component.
   We define the billiards permutation on a generalized grid polygon P in a way that extends
Defant and Jiradilok’s [7] billiards permutation for simple grid polygons. For any 1-simplex
on the boundary of a generalized grid polygon, emit a laser beam from the midpoint of the
1-simplex into the interior of P so that, when viewed under the map f , the laser beam makes
a 60◦ angle with the pane and continues in the direction as specified in §1. It keeps going
in the interior of (the geometric realization of) P in such a way that its image under f is a
straight segment, until it hits another boundary 1-simplex. It can be checked that this defines
a permutation which agrees with the billiards permutation of Defant and Jiradilok in the
case of simple grid polygons. Observe that there are no 2-cycles in a billiards permutation.
   To define the billiards system on generalized grid polygons, we first give a labeling of the
1-simplices of a generalized grid polygon as follows. Label a 1-simplex whose image under f
forms a 0◦ (60◦ , 120◦ , respectively) angle with the positive x-axis by 1 (2, 3, respectively).
Notice that each 2-simplex has its edges labeled 1, 2, 3 in clockwise order.
   The billiards permutation can be described fully at the level of the simplicial complex, as
long as a labeling is given. For a light beam coming into a 2-simplex labeled i, it hits the
1-simplex labeled i − 1 in the same 2-simplex if it is mapped under f to an upward-pointing
triangle and the 1-simplex labeled i + 1 in the same 2-simplex if it is mapped under f to a
downward-pointing triangle (taken modulo 3). If the 1-simplex it hits is not on the boundary,
the light beam travels into the adjacent 2-simplex. Otherwise, it bounces off and heads into
the same 2-simplex.
   An important fact is that the boundary alone is not enough to determine the cycle structure
of a generalized grid polygon: there exist generalized grid polygons with the same boundary
but different (valid) billiards permutations (see Figure 7).
   A horizontal strip is a generalized grid polygon whose image is a trapezoid of “height” one
whose parallel sides are horizontal. By Definition 2.2 (3), any 2-simplex ∆ of P is adjacent
to at most one 2-simplex on its left and at most one 2-simplex on its right (sharing its edges
labeled 2 or 3). Thus, starting with ∆, we can find all the 2-simplices connected to it in
this way, and call the subcomplex spanned by them h∆ . Observe that h∆ is a horizontal
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                               7




       Figure 7. Two grid polygons with the same boundary but different billiards
       permutations. They can each be seen as gluing two simple polygons together
       along the blue segments. This means that they are different as simplicial
       complexes.


strip. We call it a horizontal strip of P . Then each 2-simplex of P belongs to exactly one
horizontal strip of P . Furthermore, a horizontal strip of P is precisely the set of 2-simplices
crossed by a west-going beam of π. We show that there is a tree structure on the set of
horizontal strips of P .

Lemma 2.3. Let P be an indecomposable generalized grid polygon and let S be the set of
horizontal strips of P . Let ΓS be the following edge-labeled graph on S. For each pair of
distinct horizontal strips h1 , h2 ∈ S, add an edge between h1 and h2 labeled by the multiset
{p1 , p2 } for each maximal horizontal path p1 = p2 ⊂ h1 ∩h2 . Then ΓS is a tree. In particular,
there is at most one edge between any two vertices.

   The reason for this seemingly redundant notation is that we would also like to recon-
struct a generalized grid polygon from the information contained in a graph of the form ΓS
(the horizontal strips as the vertices and the gluing information as the edge labels), whose
horizontal strips are not known a priori to share 1-simplices (see Lemma 2.4).

Proof. Consider any edge in ΓS labeled {p1 , p2 } so that p1 = p2 ⊂ h1 ∩ h2 . We claim that
the endpoints of p1 are on the boundary of P and the other vertices of p1 are in the interior
of P . For a vertex v in the interior of p1 , the two horizontal 1-simplices incident to it are in
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                               8

the interior of P because they are shared by h1 and h2 , and the other 1-simplices incident
to v are either in the interior of h1 or that of h2 .




       Figure 8. If v is an interior vertex, Definition 2.2 (3) implies that it is con-
       tained in a hexagon, which means v cannot be an endpoint in the path.

   Now suppose v is an endpoint of p1 . For the sake of contradiction, assume that it is
an interior vertex. Then by (3) of Definition 2.2 it must be contained in exactly six 2-
simplices whose images under the simplicial map form a unit hexagon. However, this means
that there are exactly two horizontal strips that contain v (each containing three of the 2-
simplices containing v). These horizontal strips share both horizontal 1-simplices incident to
v, contradicting the assumption that v is an endpoint (see Figure 8). Hence, the horizontal
path joins two boundary vertices of P , with the interior of the path in the interior of P . Since
P is indecomposable, it is homeomorphic to a disk. Then by the Jordan curve theorem, if
we remove this horizontal path, we disconnect P . It follows that ΓS must be a tree.            □
   We can generalize this tree structure on the horizontal strips to a decomposable generalized
grid polygon P . For each component, construct the tree according to Lemma 2.3. Now for
any pair of components wedged together at point x, choose a horizontal strip containing x in
both components (this may not be unique). Then add an edge between these two horizontal
strips labeled {x, x, α}, where α ∈ [4] specifies one of the four possible orientations the
strips are attached together. Call this edge-labeled graph a tree of horizontal strips of P .
Conversely, if we are given a tree of horizontal strips, we can reconstruct a generalized grid
polygon.
Lemma 2.4. Let S be a set of horizontal strips. Let ΓS be an undirected, edge-labeled graph
on vertex set S, where an edge h1 h2 is labeled by {p1 ⊂ h1 , p2 ⊂ h2 } such that p1 , p2 are
horizontal paths of 1-simplices of the same length, or by {x, y, α} such that x is a vertex of
h1 , y is a vertex of h2 , and α ∈ [4] specifies one of four possible orientations. Suppose the
following hold:
    (1) each 1-simplex of each horizontal strip of S appears at most once in the horizontal
         paths in the edge labels; and
    (2) the graph ΓS is a tree.
Then there exists a generalized grid polygon P such that ΓS is a tree of horizontal strips of
P.
Proof. We can form a simplicial complex on the union of the elements of S by identifying p1
with p2 for each edge labeled {p1 , p2 }. We arbitrarily fix the image of some horizontal strip
under the simplicial map. Using Definition 2.2 (4), we can recover f inductively. A vertex
is an interior vertex if and only if it is in the interior of some path in an edge label. This
means that it is contained in exactly six 2-simplices, three from each horizontal strip it is
                    MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                          9

contained in. This shows that Definition 2.2 (3) holds. Definition 2.2 (2) holds trivially and
(1) holds inductively (each time we add a new horizontal strip to our tree, the simplicial
complex remains homeomorphic to a wedge of disks).                                           □


                     4                          8
               3              5        7             9
                                  6                       drop (2 4 13 8 10)   3       5         7        9
                                                                                            6
              2                                      10
                                                                                   1                 11
                    1                           11                                     14       12
                         14                12
                                  13



        Figure 9. In this diagram, if we drop the green cycle, we end up with another
        generalized grid polygon. Note that the remaining cycles and boundary panes
        are preserved.

  This section culminates with a crucial result about generalized grid polygons that helps
us prove Theorem 1.2: we can “drop” a cycle from the billiards permutation of a generalized
grid polygon and end up with another generalized grid polygon (see Figure 9).
Theorem 2.5. Let P be a generalized grid polygon with boundary loop (b1 , . . . , bn ) and
billiards permutation π. Let c = (i1 · · · ik ) be a cycle in π. Then, there exists a generalized
grid polygon with boundary (b′1 , . . . , b′m ) and billiards permutation π|[n]\{i1 ,...,ik } , such that
when viewed as vectors, b′1 , . . . , b′m are the same as bj for each j ∈
                                                                        / {i1 , . . . , ik } in index order.
We denote this generalized grid polygon by P − c.
   The reason for the formalism introduced in this section is to prove this result. In order
to show that we can drop a cycle, it suffices to describe how the process modifies the tree
of horizontal strips of the generalized grid polygon P . In particular, we will modify each
horizontal strip of P independently and then glue them back together. We need to show
that the resulting tree of horizontal strips is valid and it corresponds to the generalized grid
polygon P − c by Lemma 2.4.
Proof. Since any cycle is contained in a component, removing it does not affect other com-
ponents. Thus, it suffices to prove the case that P is an indecomposable generalized grid
polygon.
   By Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 2.4, it suffices to describe how the horizontal strips of P are
modified under the process of dropping c and show that when assembled back together, they
have the correct boundary and cycle structure. Let ΓS be the tree of horizontal strips of P .
   Let h be a horizontal strip whose top side has length p and whose bottom side has length
q. We modify h as follows: shorten each of the four sides by half the number of light beams
in c that are incident to it (see Figure 10). More formally, we remove the 2-simplices of h
crossed by a beam of c going in the 60◦ direction or the 180◦ direction (see Figure 11).
   Note that the resulting object, h′ , may no longer be a horizontal strip: if the horizontal
light beam between the two non-horizontal sides of h is a beam of c, then h′ will have height
                   MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                  10

0. We call such an object a degenerate horizontal strip. We must also check that the resulting
lengths of the four sides indeed form a (possibly degenerate) horizontal strip.




       Figure 10. An example of how a horizontal strip is modified when a cycle
       c is dropped. Here, both the top side and the bottom side are hit by c four
       times, so they are shortened by two.

   (1) Suppose that the horizontal beam in h is a beam of c. Then the two non-horizontal
       sides will have length zero, and we need to check that the top and bottom sides will
       have the same length. Indeed, if p = q + 1, then the horizontal beam will bounce up
       to hit the top side twice. The remaining beams hit the top and bottom sides exactly
       once. The case p = q − 1 follows the same argument. If p = q, then the horizontal
       beam will bounce to hit the top side and the bottom side once each.
   (2) Suppose that the horizontal beam is not in c. Then each beam hits the top side and
       the bottom side exactly once, which means that p and q will decrease by the same
       amount.




       Figure 11. Another illustration of the modification process of h. The 2-
       simplices crossed by beams of c going in the 60◦ direction or the 180◦ direction
       are removed. Furthermore, the beams not in c which go in the 60◦ and 180◦
       directions are preserved.




                Figure 12. How two adjacent horizontal strips are modified.

   Now we have a new set of (possibly degenerate) horizontal strips S ′ . We form ΓS ′ as
follows. For an edge between h1 , h2 labeled {p1 , p2 } in ΓS , add an edge between the modified
strips h′1 , h′2 labeled {p′1 , p′2 } in ΓS ′ , where p′1 consists of the 1-simplices of p1 not hit by a
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                             11

beam of c going in the 60◦ direction or the 180◦ direction (see Figure 12). If p′1 now has
length zero (i.e., is a vertex), we add the orientation α to the edge label.
   A complication is that our current tree of horizontal strips may contain degenerate hori-
zontal strips, which must be removed while maintaining a valid tree structure.




       Figure 13. When we remove a degenerate strip from ΓS ′ , we modify the
       neighborhood so that the graph remains a tree. The modified strips must
       remain connected and contractible, so it is possible to add edges labeled by a
       point and an orientation to make the graph connected (we added the dotted
       edge in the diagram).

   Suppose h is a horizontal strip of P which becomes a degenerate horizontal strip h′ . We
remove h′ from ΓS ′ and modify the neighborhood of h′ to form a new graph ΓS ′ \{h′ } . Let N
be the neighborhood of h in ΓS and N ′ the set of modified strips. Since N is an independent
set in ΓS , we would like to show that N ′ forms a tree in ΓS ′ \{h′ } . We first add edges
between horizontal strips labeled by maximal paths which collapse to the same path when h
is collapsed. Observe that collapsing h does not change the contractibility of our simplicial
complex, so this induced subgraph cannot have a cycle. Furthermore, for any horizontal
panes b and b′ of h that are collapsed together, they cannot both be on the boundary of P
since that would create a 2-cycle. This means that N ′ is connected, so we can add edges
labeled by single points and the appropriate orientation to make the induced subgraph on
N ′ connected (see Figure 13).
   Let Q denote the generalized grid polygon obtained from Lemma 2.4 using the modified
tree structure above. We now show that Q has boundary (b′1 , . . . , b′m ) and billiards permu-
tation π|[n]\{i1 ,...,ik } . The boundary of Q is as desired because for any pane on the boundary
of P , it is deleted if and only if it is a part of c, because the number of beams of c hitting a
boundary pane is either 2 or 0. It follows that the boundary of Q is traced by the vectors
corresponding to the boundary panes of P not hit by c in counterclockwise order.
   To prove that the billiards permutation also comes from the restriction of π, let b and b′
be two boundary panes of P not hit by c. Suppose that b is mapped to b′ by π. If the beam
from b to b′ is horizontal, then they are in the same horizontal strip, and remain in the same
horizontal strip so that b still maps to b′ .
   Now suppose the beam goes in the 60◦ direction. Recall that we can view the modification
of horizontal strips as deleting the 2-simplices hit by 60◦ and 180◦ beams of c, which does
not affect the 60◦ beams not in c (see Figure 11). Equivalently, we can view the modification
                   MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                  12




       Figure 14. Two different ways of viewing the modification of horizontal strips
       recover the billiards permutation.

of horizontal strips as deleting the 2-simplices hit by 240◦ and 180◦ beams of c, which shows
that the 240◦ beams not in c are also preserved (see Figure 14). This completes the proof. □

                           3. The perimeter of a grid polygon
  In this section, we prove Theorem 1.2. We do so by proving the following stronger theorem
involving generalized grid polygons (Definition 2.2).
Theorem 3.1. Let P be a generalized grid polygon. Then
                                       1
                             cyc(P ) ≤ (perim(P ) + 2 comps(P )),
                                       4
where comps(P ) is the number of components of P . Furthermore, if P is indecomposable
primitive, then
                                            1
                                  cyc(P ) = (perim(P ) + 2)
                                            4
if and only if the billiards permutation of P contains exactly two 3-cycles and no cycles of
length greater than 4.
  It suffices to prove the above for indecomposable generalized grid polygons. The proof
idea proceeds as follows: we remove an m-cycle, where m ≥ 4, and apply the induction
hypothesis to the resulting generalized grid polygon (given by Theorem 2.5) by inductively
examining an outermost component. We would like to control the number of components of
the new generalized grid polygon. Thus, we want to understand how removing a cycle can
create more components.
Lemma 3.2. Let P be an indecomposable generalized grid polygon with boundary (b1 , . . . , bn ),
and let c1 , . . . , ca be some cycles in its billiards permutation. Let Q = P − c1 − · · · − ca be the
generalized grid polygon obtained by removing c1 , . . . , ca from P (as given by Theorem 2.5)
and suppose that Q is decomposable. Let Q1 be an outermost component of Q. Suppose that
Q1 has boundary (b′1 , . . . , b′ℓ ), where b′1 corresponds to b1 and b′ℓ corresponds to bk . Then there
exists an interior path from the tail of b1 to the head of bk in P such that its image under
                    MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                       13

f is a shortest grid path and each pane in the path is crossed only by beams in the cycles
c1 , . . . , ca (see Figure 15).




        Figure 15. Illustration of an interior shortest path dividing a polygon into
        two parts which become separate components after removing the green cycle.

Proof. Let x be the tail of b1 and y the head of bk . We claim that no beam from a cycle with all
its panes in {b1 , . . . , bk } will intersect a beam from a cycle with all its panes in {bk+1 , . . . , bn }.
This is because they will still intersect after c1 , . . . , ca are removed and violate the assumption
that Q1 is a component of Q. Also, no cycle other than c1 , . . . , ca can contain both a pane
from {b1 , . . . , bk } and one from {bk+1 , . . . , bn }. Thus, starting from x, it is possible to find
an interior path (of P ) to y that does not intersect any beam other than those of c1 , . . . , ca .




        Figure 16. Whenever there is a subpath in the path that looks like the black
        segments above, we can replace it with a shorter straight segment like the red
        segment above and still have a path that only intersects the cycles c1 , . . . , ca .
   If this path is not a shortest path, we can shorten it by replacing a subpath of the form
(u, v1 , . . . , vℓ , w), where they form three sides of a trapezoid and v1 , . . . , vℓ all go in the same
direction, by the fourth side, which is strictly shorter (see Figure 16). The new path still
does not intersect any beam other than those of c1 , . . . , ca . If the new path no longer stays
in the interior and contains some boundary pane b, then the path divides the polygon into
at least three components, each of which becomes a component of Q when panes incident
to c1 , . . . , ca are removed. This violates the assumption that Q1 is an outermost component.
Thus, we can eventually arrive at a shortest interior path, as desired.                                   □
                    MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                             14

   Using Lemma 3.2, we can inductively cut an indecomposable generalized grid polygon P
into pieces which will turn into the components of Q when c1 , . . . , ca are removed (see Fig-
ure 17), by cutting out the piece corresponding to an outermost component of the remaining
part of Q at each step. Let P1 , . . . , Pk be these pieces, in the order they are obtained. We
call these a sequence of pre-components of Q. Observe that depending on the way we cut
P , this sequence of pre-components may not be unique. On the other hand, P1 always
corresponds to an outermost component of Q. Furthermore, for each i, Pi+1 , . . . , Pk is a
sequence of pre-components of the generalized grid polygon consisting of the components of
Q corresponding to Pi+1 , . . . , Pk . In future discussions, we often fix one such sequence and
refer to them as “the” pre-components of Q.


                                      4                          8
                               3               5        7             9
                                                   6                       drop (2 4 13 8 10)   3       5             7        9
                                     P1                          P3
                                                                                                             6
                               2                                      10
                                                                                                    1                     11
                                                   P2            11                                     14        12
                                      1
                                          14                12
                                                   13



        Figure 17. This is one way pre-components can be assigned for the general-
        ized grid polygon resulted from removing the green cycle.

   It follows from Lemma 3.2 that if a pane is on the boundary of a pre-component but not on
the boundary of P , it is crossed only by the cycles c1 , . . . , ca . Note that for a pre-component
Pi , when viewed as a generalized grid polygon, the beams of the cycle cj inside Pi may break
up into several cycles. This is why we proved Lemma 3.2 for removing several cycles.
   When we prove Theorem 3.1, we will induct on perim(P ): we drop an m-cycle for some
m ≥ 4 and apply induction hypothesis inside these pre-components. To do that, we need to
understand what cycles look like inside a pre-component.
Lemma 3.3. Let P be an indecomposable generalized grid polygon and Q = P − c1 − · · · − ca
the generalized grid polygon obtained by removing c1 , . . . , ca from P . Let P1 , . . . , Pk be a
sequence of pre-components of Q. Suppose that the path on the boundary of P1 but not on
the boundary of P is a shortest grid path of length k ≥ 2 (by Lemma 3.2). Then the number
of boundary panes of P inside P1 hit by c1 , . . . , ca is at least k + 2.
Proof. Suppose that the path on the boundary of P1 but not on the boundary of P has
panes p1 , . . . , pk going from left to right. By Lemma 3.2, each pi is crossed by two beams of
c1 , . . . , c a .
    First suppose that this path is straight and horizontal. Let u1 , . . . , uk be the boundary
panes of P1 hit by the northeast beams from p1 , . . . , pk , respectively. Similarly, let v1 , . . . , vk
be the boundary panes of P1 hit by the northwest beams from p1 , . . . , pk , respectively. Clearly,
u1 , . . . , uk are all distinct and v1 , . . . , vk are all distinct. Furthermore, v1 must be distinct
                    MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                     15




        Figure 18. It is impossible to only have k+1 boundary panes hit by c1 , . . . , ca .
        Either we end up with a horizontal strip (red), or our cycle encloses some
        boundary panes (blue).

from each ui . Suppose for the sake of contradiction that these k + 1 panes, v1 , u1 , . . . , uk ,
are the only boundary panes in P1 hit by c1 , . . . , ca . Then we must have
                                  v2 = u1 , v3 = u2 , . . . , vk = uk−1 .
Hence, the beam from pk to uk must bounce to v1 and bounce back to p1 . However, this
either results in P1 being a horizontal strip, in which case it will become an empty component
of Q, or the cycle will encircle some boundary panes, violating the simply-connectedness of
P (see Figure 18). Therefore, there must be at least k + 2 boundary panes hit by c1 , . . . , ca .




Figure 19. There must be at least k + 2 distinct panes on the boundary hit by c1 , . . . , ca .

   Now suppose that the path consists of panes going in the 180◦ and 240◦ direction. Then
each pane has a beam going in the northwest direction. Let the boundary panes hit by these
beams be q1 , . . . , qk . Let w1 be the boundary pane hit by the beam going west from the
first pane in the path that is in the 240◦ direction. Let w2 be the boundary pane hit by
the beam going northeast from the last pane in the path in the 180◦ direction. We claim
that q1 , . . . , qk , w1 , w2 are all distinct (see Figure 19). First, q1 , . . . , qk are all distinct and
w1 ̸= w2 . The only possibility for w1 to be in q1 , . . . qk is if w1 = q1 . However, this would
mean that q1 is a pane adjacent to the path and hit by c1 , . . . , ca . This is impossible by
Lemma 3.2. Thus, w1 ∈          / {q1 , . . . , qk }. Similarly, w2 ∈
                                                                   / {q1 , . . . , qk }.                   □
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                            16

  Now, we start by proving Theorem 3.1 for the simplest polygons: those that only contain
3-cycles in their billiards permutation.
Lemma 3.4. Let P be an indecomposable generalized grid polygon. If the billiards permuta-
tion of P contains only 3-cycles, then P is either a unit triangle or a unit hexagon consisting
of six unit triangles (see Figure 20).




       Figure 20. Any indecomposable generalized grid polygon containing only 3-
       cycles maps to a rotation of one of these two in the triangular grid.

Proof. Since a 3-cycle does not cross any interior pane twice, by Lemma 3.2, removing a
3-cycle results in an indecomposable generalized grid polygon. Suppose for the sake of
contradiction that P contains more than two 3-cycles. Then at least two of the 3-cycles in
P have the same orientation. Applying Theorem 2.5, we can sequentially remove all the
3-cycles but these two to get an indecomposable generalized grid polygon of perimeter 6
with two 3-cycles of the same orientation (suppose they are both downwards). Furthermore,
the boundary must contain exactly two panes going in the 60◦ , 180◦ , and 300◦ directions,
respectively. There are                 
                                       6 4 2
                                                   /6 = 15
                                       2 2 2
possible boundary loops. It can be checked easily that none of them can admit a cycle
structure with two 3-cycles of the same orientation.
   Therefore, any indecomposable generalized grid polygon containing only 3-cycles contains
at most two 3-cycles, and if it contains exactly two, they must have opposite orientation. □
   We now bound the number of components that an indecomposable generalized grid poly-
gon can have after removing several cycles. Suppose Q is obtained by removing some cycles
of total length m (the cycles hit m boundary panes in total) from the indecomposable gen-
eralized grid polygon P and that P1 , . . . , Pk are the pre-components of Q. We call Pi a
triangular pre-component if the parts of the cycles to be removed inside Pi form a single
triangle. Recall that we say a generalized grid polygon is primitive if it can be disconnected
by a single interior pane.
Proposition 3.5. Let c1 , . . . , ca be cycles with total length m in an indecomposable general-
ized grid polygon P and let Q = P −c1 −· · ·−ca . Fix a sequence of pre-components of Q. Let
k be the number of pre-components and t the number of triangular pre-components. Then
2k − t ≤ m − 2. Furthermore, if P is primitive, then equality holds if and only if m ≤ 4.
Proof. We induct on m. If m = 3, Lemma 3.2 implies that k = t = 1.
  Let P1 , . . . , Pk be the sequence of pre-components. Recall that P1 corresponds to an
outermost component of Q. If P1 is a triangular pre-component, then letting P ′ be P with
                   MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                17

P1 removed, we see that c1 , . . . , ca may merge or break up into some other set of cycles which
have total length m − 1. Applying the induction hypothesis, we have
                                2(k − 1) − (t − 1) ≤ (m − 1) − 2,
which is precisely what we want.
  If P1 is not a triangular pre-component, suppose that P1 ∩ P ′ is a path of length ℓ. If the
total number of panes incident to c1 , . . . , ca in P1 and P ′ are m1 and m2 , respectively, then
m1 + m2 = m + 2ℓ. By Lemma 3.3, m1 ≥ 2ℓ + 2 (if ℓ = 1, m1 ≥ 4 by the assumption that
P1 is not triangular). Then m2 ≤ m − 2. Applying the induction on P ′ ,
                                 2(k − 1) − t ≤ m2 − 2 ≤ m − 4,
which is again what we want.
  Now if P is primitive, any cut must have length at least 2. If k ≥ 2, when we induct as
above to the last remaining pre-component, we are left with a pre-component that contains
at least 6 panes incident to c1 , . . . , ca . However, this means that equality cannot hold. Thus,
we must have k = 1, and the only way equality holds is if m ≤ 4.                                 □
  Finally, we are in a position to prove Theorem 3.1.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. It suffices to prove this for P indecomposable. We induct on the
perimeter of P . Let π be the billiards permutation of P . Recall that π contains no 2-cycles.
If π contains only 3-cycles, Lemma 3.4 implies the inequality. Now suppose π contains some
m-cycle c, where m ≥ 4. If π contains no 3-cycles, the inequality immediately holds. Thus,
we may assume perim(P ) ≥ 7.
   Let Q = P − c be the generalized grid polygon obtained by removing c from P . Let
P1 , . . . , Pk be a sequence of pre-components of Q, with corresponding components Q1 , . . . , Qk ,
and let t be the number of triangular pre-components. By the induction hypothesis, for each
i ∈ [k], we have
                                                1
                                      cyc(Qi ) ≤ (perim(Qi ) + 2).
                                                4
Furthermore, if Pi is a triangular pre-component, then
                             cyc(Qi ) = cyc(Pi ) − 1
                                        1
                                      ≤ (perim(Pi ) + 2) − 1
                                        4
                                        1
                                      = (perim(Qi ) + 1).
                                        4
                   Pk                                   Pk
Since perim(P ) =    i=1 perim(Qi ) + m and cyc(P ) =     i=1 cyc(Qi ) + 1, it follows from
Proposition 3.5 that
                                          k
                                          X
                             cyc(P ) =          cyc(Qi ) + 1
                                          i=1
                                          k
                                          X perim(Qi )         2k − t
                                      ≤                    +          +1
                                          i=1
                                                    4            4
                                       1
                                      ≤ (perim(P ) + 2).
                                       4
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                              18

If m > 4 and P is primitive, Proposition 3.5 implies that the above inequality is strict. Thus,
a connected primitive equality case must contain only 3-cycles and 4-cycles.                 □

                                   4. Future Directions
   As remarked in [7] and [1], the study of combinatorial billiards is a new and rather un-
explored topic. There are many interesting avenues for future research in this area, such
as considering billiards systems in different grids, studying polygonal regions with holes,
further investigating connections with plabic graphs (see [7] for more discussions on these
directions), and studying billiards systems on other combinatorial objects (see [1]). Below,
we discuss some potential future directions more relevant to the contents of this article.
   By Theorem 1.2, the primitive equality cases contain exactly two 3-cycles and no cycles of
length greater than 4 in their billiards permutations. It is a natural question to fully classify
the equality cases.
Question 4.1. Is there a way to characterize all primitive simple grid polygons (or gener-
alized grid polygons) which have exactly two 3-cycles and no cycles of length greater than
4?
  If we look at the 1-skeleton of a generalized grid polygon (see Definition 2.2), we obtain a
connected undirected plane graph (a planar graph with a particular drawing on the plane)
such that every face except the outer face is a triangle. This is because a wedge of disks along
boundary points has an embedding in the plane. Lam and Postnikov [13] call a plane graph
which only has triangular faces a cactus. They note that a cactus (perhaps more precisely
the geometric realization of a generalized grid polygon) is either a single edge, a triangulated
disk, or a wedge of smaller cacti along their boundary vertices.
Definition 4.2 ([13]). A membrane of type A2 with boundary loop (b1 , . . . , bn ) is a pair
(G, f ) where G is a cactus on a vertex set V with a sequence of boundary vertices x1 , . . . , xn
and f is a map f : V → T to the triangular grid such that
   (1) the endpoints of any edge of G are mapped by f to endpoints of a pane, and
   (2) for each i ∈ [n], f (xi ) is the tail of bi .
A membrane of type A2 is minimal if it has the minimum possible area of any membrane of
type A2 with the same boundary loop.
   Every generalized grid polygon is a minimal membrane of type A2 by the above. In fact,
they can be viewed as simply-connected simplicial complexes (not necessarily homogeneous)
satisfying Definition 2.2 (1) and (2). Figure 5 shows an example of a minimal membrane of
type A2 which is not a generalized grid polygon. We can similarly define billiards permuta-
tions on minimal membranes of type A2 . It is not hard to see that the billiards permutation
is exactly Postnikov’s [14] strand permutation on plabic graphs under the map taking mem-
branes to plabic graphs given in [13]. We conjecture that Theorem 3.1 holds for this larger
class of objects.
Conjecture 4.3. Let P be a minimal membrane of type A2 . Then
                                     1
                            cyc(P ) ≤ (perim(P ) + 2 comps(P )).
                                     4
                 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                            19

Furthermore, if P is indecomposable, primitive, and not a single edge, then

                                          1
                                 cyc(P ) = (perim(P ) + 2)
                                          4

if and only if the billiards permutation of P contains exactly two 3-cycles and no cycles of
length greater than 4.

   The reason that our proof does not work for all minimal membranes of type A2 is that
the horizontal strips of a minimal membrane of type A2 may not have the tree structure
described in Lemma 2.3 (for example, the horizontal strips of Figure 5 form a cycle of length
four).
   Defant and Jiradilok’s motivation for their paper [7] was to understand strand permuta-
tions of plabic graphs. Our main result suggests that studying the dual objects—billiards
permutations and membranes—could prove productive due to the geometric properties that
they have. Besides Theorem 3.1, another illustration of the usefulness of generalized grid
polygons in the study of plabic graphs is a simpler proof of the following result of Defant
and Jiradilok [7].

Theorem 4.4 ([7]). If P is a simple grid polygon, then

                                              1
                                  cyc(P ) ≤     area(P ) + 1,
                                              6

where area(P ) is the number of unit triangles
                                            √ contained in P (this is the Euclidean area of
P multiplied by the normalizing factor of 4/ 3). Furthermore, equality holds if and only if
P is a tree of unit hexagons.

Proof. As in Theorem 1.2, we prove this result more generally for generalized grid polygons:

                                          1
                              cyc(P ) ≤     area(P ) + comps(P ),
                                          6

where comps(P ) is the number of components of P .
   The following generalization of a lemma of Defant and Jiradilok ([7, Lemma 3.1]) is
straightforward and we skip its proof. Let P be a generalized grid polygon which is the
union of two generalized grid polygons P1 , P2 which intersect at a single 1-simplex. Then
cyc(P ) = cyc(P1 ) + cyc(P2 ) − 1. This result reduces the inequality to the case where P is
indecomposable and primitive.
   We use Theorem 2.5 to prove the theorem via induction on area(P ). It is easy to check
that a unit hexagon satisfies the equality and any indecomposable primitive generalized
grid polygon with only once cycle satisfies the inequality strictly. Suppose P has at least
two cycles and is not a unit hexagon. Suppose we remove some m-cycle c and P − c has
components Q1 , . . . , Qk . Denote by area(c) the number of 2-simplices removed in the process
                  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                             20

of dropping c. Then
                                           k
                                           X
                           cyc(P ) = 1 +         cyc(Qi )
                                           i=1
                                           k                          
                                           X   1
                                   ≤1+                 area(Qi ) + 1
                                           i=1
                                                   6
                                                    1
                                        = k + 1 + (area(P ) − area(c)).
                                                    6
Therefore, it suffices to prove that any cycle c has area(c) > 6k. Observe that since P is
indecomposable and primitive, if k = 1, then the only cycle with area(c) ≤ 6 is the 3-cycle in
a unit hexagon. But the only indecomposable primitive generalized grid polygon with such
a 3-cycle is a unit hexagon. (The second smallest cycle has area(c) = 9).
  Now suppose k ≥ 2. Let P1 , . . . , Pk be a sequence of pre-components which correspond
to Q1 , . . . , Qk . Since P is primitive, all the shortest paths from Lemma 3.2 separating these
pre-components have length at least 2, and there is no triangular pre-component. Thus,
by Proposition 3.5, each pre-component satisfies Lemma 3.3, with at least one that is not
equality case. We can check that when the path has length at least two, at least six 2-
simplices are deleted in the process of dropping the cycle c, which completes the proof. □




       Figure 21. A grid polygon with one hole. The billiards permutation of this
       polygon has five 3-cycles.

   A natural question to consider is the generalization of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 4.4
for grid polygons with holes. It is not hard to extend Definition 2.2 to account for these
shapes and define billiards permutations on them. As noted by Defant and Jiradilok [7], the
there exists grid polygons with holes violating Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 4.4 as written (see
Figure 21). We have the following conjectural analogues of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 4.4
for grid polygons with holes.
Conjecture 4.5. If P is a grid polygon with holes, then
                              1
                     cyc(P ) ≤ (outerperim(P ) + 2 innerperim(P ) + 2),
                              4
where outerperim(P ) is the perimeter of the outer boundary of P and innerperim(P ) is the
total perimeter of the holes.
  Note that Figure 21 is an equality case of Conjecture 4.5.
                    MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CYCLES IN TRIANGULAR BILLIARDS                                      21

Conjecture 4.6. If P is a grid polygon with holes, then
                                      1
                            cyc(P ) ≤ area(P ) + holes(P ) + 1,
                                      6
where holes(P ) is the number of holes in P .
   Another possible direction is considering analogues of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 4.4 for
minimal membranes of type A3 (see [13]) and higher. A membrane of type A3 is a cactus
graph equipped with a map to the A3 root lattice (also called the face-centered cubic lattice).
For example, the cactus graph in Figure 4 can now become a membrane of type A3 , mapping
to three sides of a regular tetrahedron. We can define billiards permutations on membranes
of type A3 from strand permutations on the dual plabic graphs. However, since membranes
of type A3 are no longer mapped to a plane, the interpretation of the billiards permutation
as light beams reflecting off of mirrors needs to be modified. It would be interesting if one
can find a natural geometric interpretation for these billiards permutations.
   Finally, we can study properties of the set of billiards permutation more directly. For
example, the permutation (1 3)(2 4) ∈ S4 is not the billiards permutation of any generalized
grid polygon. Doing so might allow us to understand or characterize the difference between
the two sides of the inequality in Theorem 3.1.
Question 4.7. Characterize the subset of permutations S ⊂ Sn which appear as the billiards
permutation of some generalized grid polygon of perimeter n.
                                              References
 [1] Ashleigh Adams, Colin Defant, and Jessica Striker, Toric promotion with reflections and refractions,
     2024, arXiv:2404.03649.
 [2] Grant Barkley, Colin Defant, Eliot Hodges, Noah Kravitz, and Mitchell Lee, Bender–knuth billiards in
     coxeter groups, 2024, arXiv:2401:17360.
 [3] Grant T. Barkley and Ricky Ini Liu, Channels, billiards, and perfect matching 2-divisibility, Electron.
     J. Combin. 28 (2021), Paper No. 2.51, 48.
 [4] Carlo Boldrighini, Michael Keane, and Federico Marchetti, Billiards in polygons, Ann. Probab. (1978),
     532–540.
 [5] H. T. Croft and H. P. F. Swinnerton-Dyer, On the Steinhaus billiard table problem, Proc. Cambridge
     Philos. Soc. 59 (1963), 37–41.
 [6] Hallard T. Croft, Kenneth J. Falconer, and Richard K. Guy, Billiard ball trajectories in convex regions,
     Unsolved problems in geometry, Problem Books in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991,
     Unsolved Problems in Intuitive Mathematics, II, pp. xvi+198.
 [7] Colin Defant and Pakawut Jiradilok, Triangular-grid billiards and plabic graphs, Comb. Theory 3 (2023),
     Paper No. 9, 20.
 [8] Duane DeTemple and Jack Robertson, A billiard path characterization of regular polygons, Math. Mag.
     54 (1981), 73–75.
 [9] Duane DeTemple and Jack Robertson, Permutations associated with billiard paths, Discrete Math. 47
     (1983), 211–219.
[10] Michael Farber, Topology of billiard problems. I, II, Duke Math. J. 115 (2002), 559–585, 587–621.
[11] Eugene Gutkin, Billiards in polygons, Physica D. Nonlinear Phen. 19 (1986), 311–333.
[12] Benjamin Halpern, Strange billiard tables, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 232 (1977), 297–305.
[13] Thomas Lam and Alexander Postnikov, Polypositroids, 2020, arXiv:2010.07120.
[14] Alexander Postnikov, Total positivity, Grassmannians, and networks, 2006, arXiv:0609764.
[15] Robert Sine and Vladislav Kreı̆novič, Remarks on billiards, Amer. Math. Monthly 86 (1979), 204–206.
[16] Edwin H. Spanier, Algebraic topology., McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York-Toronto, Ont.-London,, 1966.
