                                                                          A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME

                                                                                  RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP
arXiv:2102.00346v4 [math.PR] 9 Jul 2022




                                                  Abstract. We introduce a deterministic analogue of Markov chains that we call the hunger game.
                                                  Like rotor-routing, the hunger game deterministically mimics the behavior of both recurrent Markov
                                                  chains and absorbing Markov chains. In the case of recurrent Markov chains with finitely many
                                                  states, hunger game simulation concentrates around the stationary distribution with discrepancy
                                                  falling off like N −1 , where N is the number of simulation steps; in the case of absorbing Markov
                                                  chains with finitely many states, hunger game simulation also exhibits concentration for hitting
                                                  measures and expected hitting times with discrepancy falling off like N −1 rather than N −1/2 .
                                                  When transition probabilities in a finite Markov chain are rational, the game is eventually periodic;
                                                  the period seems to be the same for all initial configurations and the basin of attraction appears to
                                                  tile the configuration space (the set of hunger vectors) by translation, but we have not proved this.




                                                                                         1. Introduction
                                             In the 1970s, Arthur Engel [5, 6] introduced a “stochastic abacus” that deterministically mimics
                                          many aspects of the behavior of finite-state Markov chains with rational probabilities. Unaware
                                          of Engel’s work, various mathematicians and physicists invented and studied the abelian sandpile
                                          model [4] and the chip-firing game [1] which in many respects embody the same core idea as Engel’s
                                          abacus but with different motivations. For books surveying chip-firing we refer readers to [11, 2].
                                             In the 2010s, inspired by Engel’s work, the second author of this paper in collaboration with
                                          Ander Holroyd [8] introduced a different way to deterministically mimic Markov chains via “rotor-
                                          routing” (unaware that physicists were already studying the process under the name “the Eulerian
                                          walkers model” [13]). The emphasis of much of this work on the rotor-router model, inspired by
                                          discrepancy theory and quasi-Monte Carlo methods, was on the fidelity of the deterministic process
                                          to the associated Markov chain. Specifically, it was shown that for certain asymptotically-defined
                                          quantities associated with Markov chains (e.g., the proportion of the time that the chain spends in a
                                          specific state), rotor-router simulation has the same limiting behavior as the Markov chain, typically
                                          with faster convergence than the Markov chain itself would typically exhibit. For a comprehensive
                                          background on chip-firing and rotor-routing and the relationship between them, we refer readers
                                          to [7].
                                             Here we discuss another way to derandomize Markov chains which we call the hunger game.
                                          It can be applied to any discrete-state discrete-time Markov chain, whether or not the transition
                                          probabilities are rational. (Rotor-routing can be extended to this regime — see the discussion of
                                          stack walks in [8] — though we know of no way to extend chip-firing in this direction.) A key
                                          difference between rotor-routing and the hunger game is that the frequency with which state i

                                            Date: July 12, 2022.
                                            Key words and phrases. chip-firing, recurrence, stationary distribution.
                                                                                                   1
2                                    RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

is followed by j in rotor-router simulation converges to the transition probability Pij ; this is not
the case for the hunger game. That is, the hunger game does not exhibit fidelity with regard to
transition-frequencies. However, we believe this may be a virtue rather than a vice, as we will
explain in the concluding section.
   In Section 2 we define the hunger game and the chip addition operators associated with it. In
Section 3 we prove fundamental results on the boundedness of hunger, and in Section 4 we prove
basic results on the behavior of chip addition operators. In Section 5 we prove the main result of this
paper, demonstrating that the normalized firing vector of a hunger game process converges to the
unique stationary distribution of an irreducible Markov chain with a discrepancy bound inversely
proportional to the number of time steps. We apply this result to show how the hunger game
process can calculate hitting probability distributions, escape probabilities, expected absorption
times, and expected return times in Section 6 . In Section 7 we focus on finite Markov chains with
rational transition probabilities. We introduce the notion of a recurrent hunger vector (a vector
that returns to itself under the hunger game) and study the properties of the basin of attraction
(the set of recurrent vectors). In the case where all transition probabilities are rational, we prove
the zero vector is always recurrent and determine its period, and conjecture that all the periods for
a given Markov chain are the same. We conclude with Section 8 , comparing the discrepancies of
the rotor-router model and the hunger game.

                                          2. Preliminaries
   See [9] or [12] for basic facts about Markov chains. Throughout this paper, except where otherwise
noted, Markov chains are assumed to have a finite state space indexed by positive integers 1, . . . , n
for some n; when we consider Markov chains with countably infinite state spaces, we will assume
that for each state i there are only finitely many states j such that the transition probability Pij
from state i to state j is positive. We can represent a Markov chain by a weighted directed graph
G = (V, E) whose vertices vi ∈ V are the allowed states and the weight of the directed edge
(vi , vj ) ∈ E is Pij . For brevity, we will use the words state and vertex to refer to both the state in
the Markov chain and the corresponding vertex in G, passing back and forth between the abstract
Markov chain and its concrete embodiment as a random walk on G. We say that state i is an
absorbing state if Pii = 1 (equivalently if G has a loop at vi with weight 1). Notice that for every
vertex v ∈ G, the sum of the weights of all edges (v, w) is 1.
   Let H = P − I, where I is the n-by-n identity matrix. Let Hi , Pi , and Ii denote the ith rows of
the matrices H, P , and I respectively. Observe that Ii = ei (the ith unit vector) and that −H is the
Laplacian of the graph. The Markov chain admits at least one stationary measure π for which
the vector v = [π(1), . . . , π(n)] satisfies vP = v (this follows from the assumption that the Markov
chain is finite; see, e.g., [12]), so 1 is an eigenvalue of P and 0 is an eigenvalue of H. All eigenvalues
of P have magnitude at most 1. When the Markov chain is irreducible (that is, when every state
can be reached from every other state in some finite number of steps), 1 is a simple eigenvalue of P
and 0 is a simple eigenvalue of H, so that H has rank n − 1, and the rows of H, taken with integer
coefficients, generate an n − 1-dimensional sublattice of the space of vectors with entries summing
to zero; in this case, there is a unique stationary measure π satisfying π(1) + · · · + π(n) = 1.
   We now informally introduce the hunger game on the weighted directed graph G by comparing
it to the chip-firing model and the rotor-router model before offering a more technical definition.
                                     A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                           3

    The “goodness” of a deterministic analogue of a random process can be assessed by the notion
of discrepancy. If some numerical characteristic of the deterministic process converges to a corre-
sponding numerical characteristic of the random process as simulation time goes to infinity, one
can try to determine the rate of convergence.
    The simplest deterministic analogues of Markov chains were invented by Engel [5, 6], under the
name the stochastic abacus (though the term chip-firing is more common nowadays). Suppose
that all the transition probabilities Pij are rational, and that we have positive integers d1 , . . . , dn
such that di Pij is an integer for all i, j. Assume that the Markov chain is irreducible. Define a chip-
configuration as an n-tuple c = (c1 , . . . , cn ); say that a chip-configuration is stable if ci < di
whenever i is a non-absorbing state. If ci ≥ di , then we obtain another chip-configuration by firing
at i, replacing c by c0 = c+di Hi ; if we represent the Markov chain by drawing a graph with vertices
v1 , . . . , vn and we represent the chip-configuration c by putting cj chips at vj for all j, then firing
means sending di Pij chips from i to j for each j 6= i. Chip-firing can be used to find the stationary
probability measure of an irreducible Markov chain as follows. Put sufficiently many chips on the
state-graph so that stabilization is impossible no matter how many firings are performed, and start
performing firings however one wishes; when we encounter a chip-configuration we have seen before
(as must happen eventually), the vector that records the number of times each state has fired will
be a stationary vector.
Example 2.1. Suppose we have the Markov chain given by the Markov matrix
                                     1 1       
                                       2  2 0
                                     1 0 1 ,
                                       2      2
                                      0 12 12
representing a doubly-reflecting random walk. Its corresponding graph is shown in Fig. 1 . If we

                                           0.5             0.5
                            0.5     v1             v2              v3     0.5
                                           0.5             0.5

             Figure 1. A graph G corresponding to a doubly-reflecting random walk.

place 1 chip at state 1, 2 chips at state 2, and 1 chip at state 3, then state 2 is unstable, so we may
fire at 2, turning the chip-configuration (1,2,1) into the chip-configuration (2,0,2). Then firing at 1
and at 3 brings us back to (1,2,1). The vector that records the number of times each state fired is
(1,1,1), which is indeed a stationary vector for this Markov chain.
   The rotor-router model [8] is a different scheme for imitating Markov chains deterministically.
Assume as above that the Markov chain has rational transition probabilities, with di as above.
Represent the Markov chain using a directed graph with di Pij parallel edges from vi to vj , so
that vi has outdegree di . Each vertex distributes arriving chips along its outgoing edges in a cyclic
manner, not sending a chip along any edge for a second time until it has sent a chip along every edge
at least once, and thereafter always sending the next chip along the edge along which it has sent a
chip least recently. Inasmuch as the vertex with the chip gets to decide where the chip goes next,
4                                     RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

we call this “supply-side” management of the chip’s movement. Assume that the Markov chain is
irreducible. It can be shown that once the chip enters an infinite loop (as must happen eventually),
the fraction of the time that the chip spends at vertex vi is proportional to the steady-state π(i).
Example 2.2. We use the same Markov chain as Example 2.1. Suppose we start with the chip at
v1 and begin the game by sending the chip to v2 , then v3 , then v3 again. Since at this point the
chip has already traveled along the edge sending v3 to v3 , it now travels along the edge from v3 to
v2 . As the chip has already gone from v2 to v3 , the rotor-router protocol dictates that it must now
travel along the other edge from v2 and go to v1 . Similarly, as it has already gone from v1 to v2 ,
now it must travel from v1 to v1 . Thereafter the process cycles forever. Since within each cycle the
chip spends 2 steps at each vertex, (2,2,2) is a stationary vector.
    The hunger game introduced in this article can be seen as a “demand-side” management
system: each vertex has a “hunger” for chips, determined by its expectation of receiving chips
from neighboring vertices that have been previously visited. When a vertex v receives a chip, the
neighboring vertices’ hunger increases in accordance to the transition probabilities from v to those
vertices, and v sends its chip to the vertex with highest hunger (regardless of whether that chip is
a neighbor of v).
    Now we give a more formal definition of the hunger game. It is simplest to start with the
situation in which the chain runs forever without restarts (in contrast to chains that will be restarted
when they enter an absorbing state). We also start with the case in which the state space is finite,
with |V | = n, deferring discussion of infinite-state spaces until later. The hunger vector h ∈ Rn
represents the hunger at each vertex in V ; we will sometimes call it the hunger state to emphasize
its interpretation as a state of the hunger game system. At each step, whichever vertex has the
highest hunger receives the chip; if vertex vi receives the chip, then the hunger vector h is updated
by adding Hi = Pi − Ii to it, corresponding to the increase in vertices’ hunger from the presence of
this chip at vi but also the satiation of vi after receiving a chip. If multiple states are tied for the
highest hunger, we break the tie by choosing the lowest-indexed such vertex. Since each row of H
has entries summing to 0, total hunger never changes.
    Each relocation of the chip is referred to as firing the chip; specifically, when the chip is relocated
at i, we say the chip fires to i. Unlike rotor-router or chip-firing, under the hunger game rules a chip
does not necessarily have to be fired to a vertex adjacent to its current location; see Example 2.3 .
In fact, the determination of the chip’s next location depends only on the hunger state h and not
the current location of the chip. The step can be described purely in terms of the matrix H and the
vector h without any reference to chips, via the rule “Replace h by h0 = h + Hi where i maximizes
hi , choosing the smallest such i in the event of a tie.”
Example 2.3. We use the same Markov chain as Example 2.1. Starting with h = 0, as shown in
Fig. 2a , regardless of the initial location of the chip, we fire the chip to v1 under the tie-breaking
rule, yielding h = − 21 , 21 , 0 as shown in Fig. 2b . After this, we fire to v2 , as shown in Fig. 2c ,
                                
and then fire to v3 , as shown in Fig. 2d . Notice that we have returned back to the initial hunger
state h = 0, so this process repeats, visiting states 1, 2, 3, then back to 1, and so on. Notice that
we fire the chip from 3 to 1 even though P31 = 0.
   If one ignores the chip and focuses on the entries of the hunger vector, the hunger game can be
viewed as a greedy variant of chip-firing. Specifically, if all entries of h and P are rational, we can
                                     A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                         5


                                           0.5             0.5
                           0.5      0               0               0     0.5
                                           0.5             0.5
                                   (a) The initial hunger state h = 0.
                                           0.5             0.5
                           0.5     -0.5            0.5              0     0.5
                                           0.5             0.5
        (b) h after firing to v1 , shown in blue. States with updated hungers are shown in yellow.
                                           0.5             0.5
                           0.5      0             -0.5             0.5    0.5
                                           0.5             0.5
        (c) h after firing to v2 , shown in blue. States with updated hungers are shown in yellow.
                                           0.5             0.5
                           0.5      0               0               0     0.5
                                           0.5             0.5
        (d) h after firing to v3 , shown in blue. States with updated hungers are shown in yellow.

                Figure 2. The hunger game on a doubly-reflecting random walk.


without loss of generality assume they are all non-negative integers (since the firing rule is invariant
under affine transformation of the hunger vector) and create a chip-configuration of the customary
kind in which the number of chips at i is hi . Then the firing rule, translated to the new context,
tells us to fire the vertex i that has the most chips, with ties resolved as before.
   When the state space is (countably) infinite, our hunger vectors are infinite sequences. We restrict
ourselves to sequences that are bounded and take on only finitely many distinct values; this ensures
that there exists at least one i for which hi equals supi hi , from which it follows that a smallest
such i exists. As each vertex has only finitely many outgoing edges, this assumption ensures that
after any finite number of steps in the hunger game there are only finitely many distinct values of
hunger, so a vertex of highest hunger can be found and the lowest-indexed one can be chosen, ad
infinitum.
   For Markov chains with absorbing states we vary the procedure slightly. We start with a graph
devoid of chips, add a chip at an initial vertex, and then follow the rule for moving the chip described
above, with the extra stipulation that when the chip reaches an absorbing vertex, it gets removed
from the graph. In more detail, we define chip addition operators Ei as follows: Given an initial
hunger vector h, we place a chip at vi (increasing the hunger of the neighbors of vi ) and add Pi to
h, and we then repeatedly move the chip to the currently hungriest vertex (the lowest-indexed one,
in the event of a tie), simultaneously incrementing the hunger vector by the row of H corresponding
to the chip’s new location, until we arrive at an absorbing vertex vk , at which point we subtract
6                                    RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

Pk = Ik from the current hunger vector and remove the chip from vk . We define Ei (h) to be the
final hunger vector, and call Ei the chip addition operator at i. It is possible for Ei (h) to be
undefined, in the event that the process never arrives at an absorbing state, but we will show in
Lemma 4.1 that for finite absorbing chains the process must terminate so that Ei is well-defined;
moreover, each chip addition operator preserves total hunger, since the sum of the entries increases
by 1 when Pi is added, stays the same each time a row of H is added, and decreases by 1 when Pk
is subtracted.
   As in the previous situation, the process can be described purely in terms of vector and matrix
operations without reference to G or a chip. Given a vector h ∈ Rn , add row Pi to h. Thereafter,
if j is the unique value such that hj 0 < hj for all j 0 < j and hj ≥ hj 0 for all j 0 > j, add Hj to
h, unless j is an absorbing state (call it k), in which case subtract Pk from the hunger vector and
stop, calling the result Ei (h).
Example 2.4. Suppose we have the Markov chain represented by the graph in Fig. 3 . It has
absorbing states v1 and v5 . Let us compute E3 (0). Starting with h = 0, for our first step we add a

                                   0.6
                                           0.6            0.2
              1     v1      0.2     v2             v3             v4             v5      1
                                                                         0.8
                                           0.2            0.4

               Figure 3. A graph G corresponding to an absorbing Markov chain.

chip to v3 to yield h = [0, 0.6, 0, 0.4, 0], as shown in Fig. 4a . After this, we follow additional steps
of the hunger game process, firing the chip successively to v2 , v4 , and v5 , as shown in Fig. 4b .
Having reached an absorbing state, the final step is to remove the chip from v5 , resulting in
E3 (0) = [0.2, 0.2, 0.4, −0.6, −0.2], as shown in Fig. 4c .
   Notice that the total hunger is 0 at the start, increases to 1 when the chip is added at v3 , stays
1 as the chip moves through G, and decreases to 0 when the chip is removed at the end.
   Since increasing the hunger at every vertex by the same amount has no effect on the dynamics
of the hunger game, when our Markov chain is finite we will often assume that total hunger is 0.

                                    3. Boundedness of hunger
  The following lemmas will be useful in our discussion of the hunger game. The first lemma shows
that on a countable Markov chain, hunger stays uniformly bounded from below under the hunger
game process, including the removal and reinsertion of the chip if it reaches an absorbing state.
Lemma 3.1. Suppose we play the hunger game for a countable Markov chain, with an initial
                                                                       (0)
hunger vector h(0) that is bounded below by hmin ∈ R, meaning hi ≥ hmin for all i. Then hunger
remains uniformly bounded below by hmin − 1 under iteration of the hunger game process. That is,
suppose we have a sequence of hunger states h(1) , h(2) , . . . such that for each k ≥ 1, h(k) is reached
from h(k−1) by either firing the chip if it is not at an absorbing state or removing and reinserting
                         (k)
the chip if it is. Then hi ≥ hmin − 1 holds for all i and k.
                                      A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                              7


                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1       0      0.2      0               0               0                   0     1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1       0      0.2     0.6              0              0.4                  0     1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
(a) The effect of inserting a chip at v3 , shown in blue. States with updated hungers are shown in yellow.
                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1      0.2     0.2     0.2             0.2             0.4                  0     1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1      0.2     0.2     0.2             0.4             -0.6                0.8    1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1      0.2     0.2     0.2             0.4             -0.6                0.8    1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
(b) h as the chip fires successively to v2 , v4 , and v5 , shown in blue. Updated hungers are shown in yellow.
                                     0.6
                                             0.6             0.2
              1      0.2     0.2     0.2             0.4             -0.6                -0.2   1
                                                                             0.8
                                             0.2             0.4
                            (c) h after removing chip from v5 , shown in yellow.

            Figure 4. The hunger game on G from Fig. 3 after inserting a chip at v3 .

                                                                                   (0)
Proof. Without loss of generality, we may take hmin to be 0, so that hi ≥ 0 for all i. Suppose
                                                                                        (k)
our claim is false, and let k be the smallest index for which the claim fails, so that hi < −1 for
some i. Consider the set S of states whose hunger changed during the hunger game process from
h(0) to h(k) ; this set must be finite, for each of the k steps can only change the hunger of finitely
many states, and must contain i. The total hunger of this set must be constant during this hunger
game process if we combine the process of removing a chip and inserting the next chip into a single
operation. Let h be the total hunger of S throughout the process. As the hunger of all states was
8                                     RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

originally bounded below by 0, we have h ≥ 0. Since in going from h(k−1) to h(k) we fired the
chip to i, vi must have been one of the hungriest vertices. But in h(k−1) , vi must have had hunger
< 0 (otherwise it could not have reached hunger < −1 in a single firing). Since the hungers of the
vertices in S have nonnegative sum, at least one of them must be nonnegative, and hence vi could
not have been one of the hungriest vertices. This contradiction shows that hunger is bounded from
below, and more specifically that hmin − 1 is a lower bound.                                     
    The lemma remains true if one replaces ≥ by > in both the hypothesis and the conclusion.

   Lemma 3.1 only provides a uniform lower bound on hunger; a uniform upper bound on hunger
does not exist in general for countable Markov chains. One may construct Markov chains where
depending on the location of chip insertion, hunger can grow arbitrarily large at a certain state. As
a specific example, consider the countably infinite Markov chain shown in Fig. 5 . We have states
vi,j for all integers i ≥ j ≥ 0, where v0,0 is an absorbing state. A walker at vertex vi,j for i > j
                                                                                                 1
moves with equal probability to any vertex vi,k with k > j, in other words with probability i−j      to
vi,k for all j + 1 ≤ k ≤ i, and a walker at vi,i moves with probability 1 to the absorbing vertex
v0,0 . Starting with h = 0, inserting a chip at vn,0 for n > 0 causes the chip to move from vn,0 to
vn,n , increasing the second coordinate by 1 each step (i.e. moving one position to the right at each
step). When the chip fires to vn,n−1 , state vn,n has hunger 1 + 21 + 13 + · · · + n1 , the nth partial
sum of the harmonic series. As the harmonic series diverges, by picking sufficiently large n, hunger
can become arbitrarily large at vn,n , and is thus not uniformly bounded under the hunger game
process, when chip removal and insertion are allowed.
   This example used a countably infinite state space, which is necessary for this unbounded behav-
ior to occur. As shown in the following lemma, for a finite Markov chain, hunger stays uniformly
bounded from both sides under the hunger game process, including the removal and reinsertion of
the chip if it reaches an absorbing state.
Lemma 3.2. For a given hunger state h(0) on a finite Markov chain, hunger remains uniformly
bounded under the hunger game process. In other words, there exist a, b ∈ R such that for any
sequence of hunger states h(1) , h(2) , . . . , where for each k ≥ 1, h(k) is reached from h(k−1) by either
firing the chip if it is not at an absorbing state or removing and reinserting the chip if it is, the
                 (k)
inequality a ≤ hi ≤ b holds for all i and k.
Proof. The existence of a lower bound a follows directly from Lemma 3.1 , as any hunger state on
a finite Markov chain must be bounded.
   As hunger is bounded from below by a and total hunger h is constant during the hunger game
process, when we conceive of removing a chip and inserting the next chip as occurring simultane-
ously, the hunger of any single vertex cannot exceed h − (n − 1)a, and thus hunger is bounded from
above and b exists.                                                                              
Remark 3.3. When all transition probabilities are rational and the Markov chain has no absorbing
states, so that we never remove and reinsert the chip—which introduces choice into the hunger
game—we claim Lemma 3.2 implies that the hunger game is eventually periodic. Let d be the
least common multiple of the denominators of all the transition probabilities. For any h(0) , as each
entry is uniformly bounded and may only change by a multiple of d1 , there are only finitely many
                                         A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                   9


                      1

                     v0,0

                              1
                                           1
                     v1,0     1    v1,1              1
                                                                1



                     v2,0    1/2   v2,1        1   v2,2
                                   1/2


                     v3,0    1/3   v3,1    1/2     v3,2    1    v3,3
                                   1/3             1/2
                                           1/3
                     v4,0    1/4   v4,1    1/3     v4,2   1/2   v4,3     1   v4,4
                                   1/4             1/3          1/2
                                                                                    ..
                                           1/4            1/3                            .
                                                   1/4
                      ..            ..              ..              ..        ..
                       .             .               .               .         .

       Figure 5. A countably infinite absorbing Markov chain where hunger is not uni-
       formly bounded under chip addition operators.

values that h(k) may take on as k varies. This implies that eventually we must have h(j) = h(i)
with j > i, so that the hunger game has become periodic with period dividing j − i. If we define v
as the vector that counts the number of visits to each state of the chain from time i + 1 to time j,
                                                                     1
we have vH = 0, implying that v is a stationary vector and that j−i    v is the stationary probability
measure for the Markov chain. Theorem 5.1 extends this claim, in a suitable asymptotic sense, to
situations in which the transition probabilities are not all rational.

                            4. Termination of stabilization processes
  An absorbing Markov chain is a (not necessarily finite) Markov chain where each vertex has
a path of finite length to an absorbing state. For example, the infinite Markov chain shown in
Fig. 5 is absorbing, as a walker at any vertex vi,j can move to absorbing vertex v0,0 within 2 moves.
We claim that in a finite absorbing Markov chain, the chip addition process at any vertex v in the
corresponding graph G is guaranteed to terminate, regardless of the initial hunger state, and thus
10                                  RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

the chip addition operators Ei are well-defined for finite absorbing Markov chains. This follows
immediately from the finiteness of G and the following lemma:
Lemma 4.1. For a finite absorbing Markov chain, each vertex v gets visited only finitely often in
the hunger game before the chip reaches an absorbing vertex.
Proof. The assumption that the Markov chain is absorbing guarantees that for each v there is a finite
path w0 , w1 , . . . , wm such that w0 is v, wm is an absorbing vertex, and the transition probability
from wi to wi+1 is positive for all 0 ≤ i ≤ m − 1. We prove the claim by induction on m. The
case m = 0 is trivial, as once the chip visits an absorbing vertex it is removed. For a less trivial
case, consider m = 1. For sake of contradiction, suppose v = w0 is visited infinitely often. Each
time w0 is visited, the hunger of w1 increases by a fixed amount. As w1 is an absorbing vertex,
we cannot visit it, as otherwise we would only visit w0 finitely often before reaching an absorbing
vertex. This implies the hunger of w1 increases unboundedly due to w0 being visited infinitely often,
contradicting the existence of an upper bound on hunger demonstrated in Lemma 3.2. Hence w0
is visited finitely often, proving the case m = 1.
   The inductive step follows similar reasoning to the m = 1 argument. Suppose now that the claim
is true for m − 1, so that w1 is visited only finitely often. Assume for sake of contradiction that w0
is visited infinitely often, where each visit increases the hunger of w1 by a fixed amount. After w1
is visited for the last time, its hunger must grow without bound due to w0 being visited infinitely
often; this contradicts Lemma 3.2 . Hence the claim holds for all vertices.                          
  Since G has only finitely many vertices, each of which can fire only finitely many times before
the chip is absorbed, the chip must eventually be absorbed, as claimed.
  A weakened version of this lemma applies to countable absorbing Markov chains.
Proposition 4.2. On a countable absorbing Markov chain, if we add a chip and then perform
repeated firing, then either the chip eventually gets absorbed or the chip is not confined within any
finite subset of the state space.
Proof. If the Markov chain is finite, the result immediately follows from Lemma 4.1 , so assume the
state space is countably infinite. Suppose there is a finite subset U of the state space V such that
the chip is always in U . Consider the set S given by
                                S = U ∪ {v ∈ V | ∃ i ∈ U : Pij > 0}.
Because U is finite and each vertex has finitely many outgoing edges, S is also finite. Crucially, as
the chip is bounded within U , the only states whose hunger can change during the chip addition
process are the states in S. Hence, we may equivalently view the hunger game as acting upon
the induced subgraph of G formed from using S as the vertex set, and from Lemma 4.1 the result
follows.                                                                                           
Remark 4.3. For infinite absorbing Markov chains, it is possible for the chip to wander off without
being confined to any finite subset of the state space. As a simple example, based on the goldbug
system introduced by the second author of this article as described in Kleber [10], take N ∪ {−1}
as the state space where states −1 and 0 are absorbing, and for i ≥ 1, a walker at vertex i moves
to vertex i − 2 and i + 1 each with probability 12 , as shown in Fig. 6 . Using the hunger state h
where h−1 = h0 = h1 = − 12 and hi = 0 for i > 1, as shown in Fig. 7a , a chip inserted at state 1,
                                    A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                       11

as shown in Fig. 7b , will move rightwards one state at a time to infinity; the first few steps of the
process are shown in Fig. 7c .

                 1          1

                v−1         v0         v1   1/2   v2    1/2   v3    1/2   v4   1/2 · · ·

                           1/2        1/2         1/2         1/2

                                 Figure 6. The goldbug system.


                                  5. Stationary distributions
  We now consider the hunger game process for nonabsorbing Markov chains, so that chips are
never inserted or removed.
  Say that a vector v is stationary under P if vP = v, or equivalently vH = v(P − I) = 0.
Let E be the space of vectors that are stationary under P , or equivalently the nullspace of H.
When the Markov chain is irreducible, so that there is a unique stationary distribution π, E is the
1-dimensional subspace of Rn consisting of multiples of [π(1), . . . , π(n)].
  Define the firing vector v after N steps of a hunger game process to be the vector whose ith
component vi is the number of times Hi was added to h, i.e. the number of times the chip fired
                                                                                        v
to vertex vi . The following theorem demonstrates that the normalized firing vector N      approxi-
mates the unique stationary distribution π of an irreducible finite Markov chain within a distance
proportional to N −1 .
Theorem 5.1. Given a hunger game process on an irreducible finite Markov chain, let v(N ) be
the firing vector after N steps. Then the sequence of normalized firing vectors N1 v(N ) converges
to the unique stationary distribution π, where there exists a constant C such that for all N , the
                                            C
normalized firing vector is within distance N of π in the L1 metric.
Proof. Since the Markov chain is irreducible, 0 is a simple eigenvalue of H. Let c be the maximum of
1/|λ| where λ ranges over the nonzero eigenvalues of H. For d ∈ R, let Ud = {x | x1 + · · · + xn = d},
where there are n states in the Markov chain. The fact that 0 is a simple eigenvalue of H and that
every other eigenvalue has norm at least 1/c implies that the restriction of H to an affine map from
U1 to U0 is invertible, and that if two points p(1) , p(2) ∈ U0 are within distance ε, then their two
preimages x(1) , x(2) ∈ U1 are within distance cε of each other.
   It follows that if we have a point p ∈ U0 within distance ε of 0, the preimages v, π ∈ U1 of p
and 0, respectively, are within distance cε of each other. As a result, v is within distance cε of the
stationary distribution π.
   By Lemma 3.2 , during any hunger game process hunger remains bounded, so the change in
hunger after N steps, given by v(N ) H, is within a bounded distance, say b, of 0. This implies
  1 (N )
 Nv        H is within distance Nb of 0, which implies the normalized firing vector N1 v(N ) is within
           bc
distance N    of a stationary distribution π. Setting C = bc yields our desired result.             
12                                     RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP


                   1           1

                  − 12        − 12        − 12   1/2         1/2         1/2       1/2 · · ·
                                                        0           0          0

                              1/2         1/2          1/2         1/2
                                       (a) The initial hunger state h.
                   1           1

                              − 12        − 12   1/2    1    1/2         1/2       1/2 · · ·
                   0                                    2           0          0

                              1/2         1/2          1/2         1/2
     (b) h after inserting a chip at v1 , shown in blue. States with updated hungers are shown in yellow.
                   1           1

                                          − 12   1/2 − 1     1/2    1    1/2       1/2 · · ·
                   0           0                       2            2          0

                              1/2         1/2          1/2         1/2
                   1           1

                                                 1/2 − 1     1/2 − 1     1/2   1   1/2 · · ·
                   0           0           0           2           2           2

                              1/2         1/2          1/2         1/2
                   1           1

                                                 1/2         1/2 − 1     1/2 − 1   1/2 · · ·
                   0           0           0            0          2           2

                              1/2         1/2          1/2         1/2
(c) h as the chip fires successively to v2 , v3 , and v4 , shown in blue. Updated hungers are shown in yellow.

         Figure 7. A hunger state on the goldbug system where a chip inserted at v1 goes
         to infinity.

Remark 5.2. As the only time irreducibility was assumed in Theorem 5.1 was when we claimed the
Markov chain had a unique stationary distribution π, the result holds for any finite Markov chain
with a unique stationary distribution. Namely, it also works for absorbing Markov chains with a
single absorbing state vk , where π is the vector with a 1 corresponding to state vk and 0s elsewhere.
   When a unique stationary distribution exists, the stationary distribution represents, in the long
run, the probability distribution of the chain being at each particular state, or the occupation
frequency distribution. As a result, Theorem 5.1 illustrates that the normalized firing vector,
                                     A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                         13

which counts how many times the chip arrives at each state in the hunger game, approximates
the occupation frequency distribution within a discrepancy proportional to N −1 , better than the
N −1/2 discrepancy expected from repeated samplings of the corresponding random process.
Example 5.3. The Markov      chain described in Example 2.3 is irreducible, and has unique stationary
distribution π = 13 , 31 , 13 , as shown in Fig. 8 . From Example 2.3 we know that the states are visited

                                            0.5            0.5
                                    1               1               1
                            0.5     3               3               3     0.5
                                            0.5            0.5

        Figure 8. The unique stationary distribution π of a doubly-reflecting random walk

periodically in the order 1, 2, and 3, so the firing vector starting at h = 0 is given by
                                                           
                                  (N )      N +2      N +1        N
                                v      =            ,          ,       ,
                                              3          3        3
or equivalently
                                        v(3M ) = [M, M, M ]
                                    v(3M +1) = [M + 1, M, M ]
                                    v(3M +2) = [M + 1, M + 1, M ] .
Theorem 5.1 guarantees the existence of some constant C such that the normalized firing vector
1 (N )           C
Nv     is within N of π for all N . In fact, we will show
                                                     1 1 C    = 43 is the minimal such constant.
Then for N = 3M , the normalized firing vector his 3 , 3 , 13 , so there
                                                             
                                                                        i is no discrepancy, while
                                                       M +1     M       M
for N = 3M + 1 the normalized firing vector is 3M         +1 , 3M +1 , 3M +1 , whose discrepancy from
                     4/3
π = 31 , 31 , 13 is 3M      C
               
                       +1 = N . Similarly for N = 3M + 2.
   In general, however, unlike in this example, the sequence of states visited need not be periodic,
as the transition probabilities can be irrational.

                       6. Hitting Probabilities and Absorption Times
   Let X0 , X1 , . . . be a Markov chain on a finite state space V , and let Pv denote the law of the
Markov chain initialized at state v, or in other words X0 = v. Define Tu to be the hitting time
of vertex u by the Markov chain, given by
                                        Tu = min{t ≥ 0 : Xt = u},
where if no such t exists then Tu = ∞.
  For an absorbing Markov chain, let the set of absorbing states be U ⊆ V . If our starting vertex
v belongs to U , then the behavior of the chain is trivial, so we will assume henceforth that v 6∈ U .
We define the hitting probability of u ∈ U by
                            hu (v) = Pv (Xt = u for all t sufficiently large),
14                                      RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

where Pv denotes the law of the Markov chain initiated at v. The hitting probability is equivalently
                                    hu (v) = Pv (∀u0 ∈ U, Tu ≤ Tu0 ),
which will give us the flexibility later on to modify the Markov chain so that the states in U are
no longer absorbing. As an absorbing Markov chain reaches an absorbing state with probability 1,
for any v we have
                                            X
                                                hu (v) = 1.
                                              u∈U
   In order to measure hitting probabilities hu (v) through the hunger game process, we consider a
modification of the Markov chain in which all absorbing states go to v with probability 1. In other
words, for each u ∈ U we replace Pu , the row of P corresponding to state u, with ev , the unit vector
corresponding to v. Crucially, this modification does not change the hitting probabilities hu (v) as
given by our second definition. Additionally, we remove any states in V that cannot be reached
from v with positive probability; this does not alter the hitting probabilities. We will refer to this
modified Markov chain as the rerouted Markov chain associated with v. Due to the removal of
unreachable states, a rerouted Markov chain of an absorbing Markov chain is always irreducible.
Example 6.1. Consider the absorbing Markov chain given in Fig. 9a , which has absorbing states
v1 and v4 . The rerouted Markov chain associated with non-absorbing state v2 is shown in Fig. 9b ,

                                                                  1
                                            0.5
              1     v1     0.5     v2               v3    0.5    v4     0.5     v5   0.5
                                            0.5
                                    (a) An absorbing Markov chain.

                                    1                      1

                            v1     0.5       v2     0.5    v3     0.5    v4
                                                    0.5
                           (b) The rerouted Markov chain associated with v2 .

                                 Figure 9. A rerouted Markov chain.

where since v5 cannot reach v2 with positive probability, it is removed from the system; this ensures
that the Markov chain is irreducible. Hence, it has a unique stationary distribution; this applies
for all rerouted Markov chains of any finite absorbing Markov chain.
     The following lemma will be useful for the upcoming result, Theorem 6.3.
Lemma 6.2. Let a and b be positive real numbers and let a0 and b0 be nonnegative real numbers.
For a given ε satisfying 0 ≤ ε < a+b       0               0
                                  2 , if |a − a| ≤ ε and |b − b| ≤ ε, then
                                         a−ε     a0     a+ε
                                             ≤ 0    0
                                                      ≤     .
                                         a+b  a +b      a+b
                                     A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                           15

                                                                                       0
Proof. Let a0 = a + δ1 and b0 = b + δ2 , where |δ1 |, |δ2 | ≤ ε. First, notice that a0a+b0 is well-defined,
                                                                      0
as a0 + b0 = a + b + δ1 + δ2 ≥ a + b − 2ε > 0. Since a0 ≥ 0, a0a+b0 ≥ 0. Holding a and b fixed, we
                          0             0             b+δ2
see that the quantity a0a+b0 = 1/(1 + ab 0 ) = 1/(1 + a+δ 1
                                                            ) is weakly increasing with respect to δ1 and
weakly decreasing with respect to δ2 . (Technically this argument requires a + δ1 > 0 and therefore
does not handle the case a0 = 0 but this case is easily dealt with separately.) Hence, within the
                           0
bounds for δ1 and δ2 , a0a+b0 is minimized when δ1 = −ε and δ2 = ε, yielding
                             a0         a + δ1          a−ε     a−ε
                           0    0
                                  =                 ≥         =     ,
                          a +b      a + b + δ1 + δ2   a+b−ε+ε   a+b
       0
and a0a+b0 is maximized when δ1 = ε and δ2 = −ε, yielding
                          a0         a + δ1          a+ε     a+ε
                        0    0
                               =                 ≤         =     ,
                       a +b      a + b + δ1 + δ2   a+b+ε−ε   a+b
which completes the proof.                                                                               
  The following theorem demonstrates how the hitting probabilities of a finite absorbing Markov
chain are approximated by the firing vector of the rerouted Markov chain.
Theorem 6.3. Given a finite absorbing Markov chain, let v(N ) be the firing vector after N steps
of a hunger game process on the rerouted Markov chain associated with state v. Then the sequence
{aN } defined by
                                                       (N )
                                                  vu
                                            aN = X (N ) ,
                                                    vu0
                                                   u0 ∈U

where we define aN to be 0 when the denominator equals 0, converges to the hitting probability hu (v)
with discrepancy O(1/N ); that is, there exists a constant C such that aN differs from hu (v) by at
      C
most N   for all N .
Proof. In the rerouted Markov chain, v can reach every state in V , and every state in V can reach
an absorbing state (as the original Markov chain was absorbing), which in the rerouted Markov
chain moves back to v with probability 1; as a result, the rerouted Markov chain is irreducible. By
Theorem 5.1 , the normalized firing vector N1 v(N ) converges to the unique stationary distribution
π of the rerouted Markov chain within distance Nc for some constant c.
   It is a standard fact that the expected number of visits to state w before returning to v is given by
πw                                                                         0
π v ; see, for example, [12, Theorem 1.7.6]. But, as after visiting some u ∈ U the next state visited
must be v, meaning u0 can be visited at most once before returning to v, the expected number of
visits to any such u0 equals the probability of visiting u0 before returning to v. As a result, for all
u ∈ U , the hitting probability hu (v) is proportional to π u , and given that an absorbing Markov
chain reaches an absorbing state with probability 1, we have
                                                      πu
                                           hu (v) = X        .
                                                        π u0
                                                     u0 ∈U
16                                            RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP
          P
     As       u0 ∈U π u0 is a positive constant, there exists a finite M such that for all N > M we have
                                                        c   1 X
                                                          <     π u0
                                                        N   2 0
                                                              u ∈U

with c as above. As aN ∈ [0, 1] is bounded, there exists a constant C1 such that aN is within CN1 of
hu (v) ∈ [0, 1] for all N ≤ M ; in particular, C1 = M suffices.
   For N > M , notice that
                                                (N )     1                  (N )
                                        vu              N vu
                                  aN = X (N ) =                                                 .
                                                1 (N )                                1 (N )
                                                           X
                                          vu0   N vu   +                              N vu0
                                            u0 ∈U                        u0 ∈U \{u}

                                                                                                1 (N )
As N1 v(N ) is within distance Nc of π in the L1 metric, we know both                           N vu   − πu        ≤ Nc and

                                            X        1 (N )    X                       c
                                                       vu0 −               π u0 ≤        .
                                                     N                                 N
                                        u0 ∈U \{u}           0u ∈U \{u}

Due to the rerouted Markov chain being irreducible, we also know that π v > 0 for all states v ∈ V ;
in addition, each component of the visit vector v(N ) is a nonnegative integer. Lastly, by definition
of M , we have
                                                                 
                                    c     1            X
                               0≤      <      πu +           π u0  .
                                    N     2           0             u ∈U \{u}

Letting ε = Nc , we apply Lemma 6.2 with the values
                                 X                                    1 (N )                                 X          1 (N )
 a = π u > 0,             b=                π u0 > 0,        a0 =      v     ≥ 0,                   b0 =                 v 0 ≥0
                                                                      N u                                               N u
                               u0 ∈U \{u}                                                                  u0 ∈U \{u}

to find
                                                              (N )
                          π u − Nc                 1
                                                  N vu                                    π u + Nc
                                        ≤                                       ≤                       ,
                                          1 (N )                           (N )
                              X                      X                                        X
                                                                        1
                      πu +         π u0   N vu   +                      N vu0
                                                                                      πu +         π u0
                           u0 ∈U \{u}                      u0 ∈U \{u}                        u0 ∈U \{u}

or equivalently
                                         1    c                      1    c
                             hu (v) −      · X       ≤ aN ≤ hu (v) +   · X       .
                                         N      π u0                 N      π u0
                                               u0 ∈U                                    u0 ∈U

     Thus, the deviation of aN from hu (v) is at most
                                                        1    c
                                                          · X       .
                                                        N      π u0
                                                            u0 ∈U
                                    A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                        17

The second factor is a constant, which we will denote C2 , and thus taking C = max(C1 , C2 ) we
                                                        C
find that for all N , aN differs from hu (v) by at most N .                                   
Remark 6.4. We can apply Theorem 6.3 to deterministically approximate the escape probability of
u from v on an irreducible Markov chain, or the probability that a chain starting at state v reaches
state u before returning to v. We do this by splitting vertex v into vertices v0 and v1 where all
outgoing edges of v now emanate from v0 and all inbound edges of v now end at v1 . Furthermore,
we may remove all outgoing edges from vertex u. The resulting Markov chain is absorbing with the
set of absorbing states U = {u, v}, and thus one may use Theorem 6.3 on the rerouted Markov chain
associated with state v0 to approximate the hitting probability hv1 (v0 ). Notice that hv1 (v0 ) equals
the escape probability of u from v in the original irreducible Markov chain, and thus Theorem 6.3
enables us to calculate escape probabilities.
   We now consider the absorption time of an absorbing Markov chain whose set of absorbing
states is U ⊆ V , given by
                                     TU = min{t ≥ 0 : Xt ∈ U }.
At the absorption time, the chain enters an absorbing state, where it remains forever.
   For example, starting at state v2 in the absorbing Markov chain given in Fig. 9a, with probability
1
2  we enter absorbing state v1 in the first step, and otherwise move to state v3 , which has the same
50-50 split between moving to an absorbing state (v4 ) or not (v2 ). Thus TU in this case is a
geometric random variable with success probability 21 , which has expected value 2.
   The expected absorption time is Ev TU , where Ev denotes the expected value for the law of the
Markov chain initialized at state v. Then, when using the rerouted Markov chain, a chain can
naturally be divided into epochs each of which ends with an occurrence of a state in U , which
is then rerouted in the next time step to v. Hence, the expected absorption time Ev TU can be
calculated from the stationary distribution π of the rerouted Markov chain associated with v to be
                                                     1
                                         Ev TU = X        − 1.
                                                       πu
                                                 u∈U

Notice that if v ∈ U , then Ev TU = 0 = 11 − 1; the −1 term corresponds to the extra time step
needed to reroute from an absorbing state to v for each epoch.
  The following theorem shows how the expected absorption time of an absorbing Markov chain
can be approximated using the normalized firing vector of the rerouted Markov chain.
Theorem 6.5. Given an absorbing Markov chain, let v(N ) be the firing vector after N steps of
the hunger game process on the rerouted Markov chain associated with state v. Then the sequence
{bN } defined by
                                               N
                                         bN = X        − 1,
                                                vu(N )
                                               u∈U
where we define bN to be 0 when the denominator equals 0, converges to the expected absorption
                                                                             C
time Ev TU , where there exists a constant C such that bN is within distance N of Ev TU for all N .
18                                  RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

Proof. From the proof of Theorem 6.3 , we see that the rerouted Markov chain has a unique sta-
tionary distribution π, and thus the normalized firing vector N1 v(N ) converges to π within distance
 c
N for P
      some constant c.
   As u∈U π u is a positive constant, there exists a finite M such that for all N > M we have
                                              c   1X
                                                <    πu.
                                              N   2
                                                        u∈U

As bN is finite, there exists a constant C1 such that bN is within CN1 of Ev TU for all N ≤ M . For
N > M , it suffices to show the existence of a constant C2 such that for all N > M ,


                                      1                  1                   C2
                                    X 1                −X                <      .
                                                               πu            N
                                              vu(N )
                                          N              u∈U
                                    u∈U

The furthest away bN can be from Ev TU results in the left hand side becoming
                      1        1      1                                             c
                    c       −X      =   ·                                               !              !.
                                      N
                       X
                   − +   πu      πu                            c  X                         X
                    N                                         − +   πu                            πu
                          u∈Uu∈U                               N
                                                                         u∈U                u∈U

As N > M , we have
                                      c   X      1X
                                  −     +   πu >    π u > 0,
                                      N          2
                                          u∈U                 u∈U

so in the worst case the deviation from Ev TU is less than
                                          1              2c
                                            ·                     !2 .
                                          N            X
                                                             πu
                                                       u∈U

The second factor is a constant, which we will denote C2 , and thus taking C = max(C1 , C2 ) yields
                   C
that bN is at most N  away from Ev TU for all N .                                                

Remark 6.6. We can apply Theorem 6.5 to calculate the expected return time for state v in an
irreducible Markov chain. We do this in a similar method to Remark 6.4 by splitting vertex v into
vertices v0 and v1 where all outgoing edges of v now emanate from v0 and all inbound edges of v
now end at v1 . The resulting Markov chain is absorbing with unique absorbing state v1 , and thus
one may use Theorem 6.5 on the rerouted Markov chain associated with state v0 to approximate
the expected absorption time. As v1 is the only absorbing state, this calculates the expected hitting
time from v0 to v1 , which is the expected return time from v in the original irreducible Markov
chain.
                                     A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                          19

                     7. Recurrent states and the basin of attraction
   In this section we restrict our attention to irreducible finite Markov chains with no absorbing
state. Additionally we assume that all transition probabilities are rational.
   From the argument in Remark 3.3, all hunger vectors h ∈ Rn are pre-periodic (i.e., eventually
enter a cycle). We say that a vector that is part a cycle (i.e., returns to itself after a finite number
of steps) is recurrent, and we define the basin of attraction to be the set of recurrent vectors
on the hyperplane Z = {h | h · 1 = 0} (the hyperplane of hunger vectors with total hunger 0).
The basin of attraction, being the set of recurrent vectors, is thus in some sense analogous to the
critical group Zn /Zn ∆ in the context of chip-firing.
Example 7.1. Consider the finite rational irreducible Markov chain with hunger matrix
                                                                 
                                              −0.2 0.2         0
                                      H =  0.2 −0.6 0.4 ,
                                               0.6      0.4 −1
                                            11 5 2
                                                       
whose unique stationary distribution is 18    , 18 , 18 . Its basin of attraction is given in Fig. 10. The
basin is partitioned into four colors based on the firing order, up to cyclic shift. Red corresponds
to the cyclic firing order 231121121311211211, i.e., firing state 2, then state 3, then state 1, and
so on. Green corresponds to 312112112311211211, cyan corresponds to 231112112311211211, and
violet corresponds to 312112112311121121. As the visit vector for each of these 18-step cycles must
satisfy vH = 0, i.e., be a multiple of the stationary distribution, we find each cyclic firing order
consists of state 1 firing eleven times, state 2 firing five times, and state 3 firing two times.
Remark 7.2. Numerous observations can be made from Example 7.1 and Fig. 10. Firstly, the
partitioning based on cyclic firing order appears to yield discrete congruent pieces; in Fig. 10, the
red and violet colors are split into congruent parallelograms, and the cyan and green colors are
each split into congruent triangles. Each color corresponds to a cyclic firing order, and if this cycle
has period p, then the set of vectors of this particular color can be partitioned into p sets based on
the firing order of their cycle, no longer up to cyclic shift. Each of these sub-pieces are mapped to
each other in a cycle under the hunger game process, so clearly the sub-pieces of a given color are
all congruent.
   While evidently the entire basin of attraction need not be convex, each sub-piece of the basin
of attraction, e.g., the parallelograms and triangles of Fig. 10, is convex; this holds for all finite
rational Markov chains. To see why this is the case, notice that each sub-piece corresponds to a
unique firing order that returns a hunger vector to itself. The set of vectors that will fire to a given
state next under the hunger game process is given by the intersection of various linear inequalities,
namely the inequalities that ensure this state had the highest hunger. Hence, the set of vectors
that follow the firing order corresponding to a given sub-piece is given by the intersection of various
linear inequalities, one set of inequalities for each firing step of the hunger game process. As the
intersection of linear inequalities is convex, we find each sub-piece is convex.
   Intuitively, the basin of attraction should be near the origin, for the hunger game naturally
attempts to equilibrate the hunger vector so that each state has approximately the same hunger.
The following result supports this intuition by demonstrating that the origin is always in the basin
of attraction for any finite rational irreducible Markov chain.
20                                   RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP




        Figure 10. The basin of attraction for a finite rational irreducible Markov chain
        with three states. The basin lies in the hyperplane x + y + z = 0, so the third
        coordinate is omitted in order to plot it on the x, y-plane. For example, the point
        (0.8, −0.1) in the rightmost violet region corresponds to h = (0.8, −0.1, −0.7). The
        basin is partitioned into four colors based on the order of firings; for example, the
        vectors in the violet portions of the basin all follow the same sequence of firings, up
        to cyclic shift, i.e., choosing a starting index for the periodic firing sequence. So,
        the four colors correspond to four distinct cyclic firing orders.

Proposition 7.3. For any finite rational irreducible Markov chain, the zero vector 0 is a recurrent
hunger state. Moreover, the number of steps needed to return to 0 is the least common denominator
of the stationary probabilities of the Markov chain.
Proof. Let d be the least common denominator of the transition probabilities of the Markov chain.
Viewing the Markov chain as a weighted digraph G with each vertex having outgoing weights
summing to 1, we can multiply all weights by d so that all weights are now positive integers, and
convert weighted edges into multiedges to obtain a directed multigraph G0 in which every vertex
has outdegree d.
   A finite irreducible Markov chain with rational transition probabilities has a unique stationary
distribution π, all of whose entries are rational. Let n be the least common denominator of π, so
that nπ is the unique multiple of π that has nonnegative, mutually coprime integer entries, and
let p = nπ. Since the sum of the entries of π is 1, the sum of the entries of p is n. As πH = 0, we
have pH = 0.
   Starting at 0, consider the first vertex v that fires more than pv times, and consider the hunger
state just before this vertex fires for the (pv + 1)-th time. Let the firing vector at this step be x, so
that xu is the number of times state u received the chip, and thus xH is the current hunger state.
                                    A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                        21

Because xv = pv and because for all u 6= v state u has fired at most pu times, w := p − x satisfies
wv = 0 and wu ≥ 0 for all u 6= v. Firing vertices u 6= v can only (weakly) increase the hunger of
v, so (wH)v ≥ 0. To prove that last assertion more formally, recall that wv = 0, so we can write
w = u6=v cu e(u) with cu ≥ 0 for all u, where e(u) is the elementary basis vector with a 1 at index
     P
u and 0 otherwise. Then we have
                               X                  X            X
                     (wH)v =       cu (e(u) H)v =     cu Huv =    cu Puv ≥ 0,
                                 u6=v              u6=v          u6=v

as claimed. This yields that
                               (xH)v = (pH − wH)v = −(wH)v ≤ 0.
Yet with a hunger state of xH, vertex v received the chip, meaning it has the highest hunger. This
means every state has hunger at most (xH)v ≤ 0, so total hunger is at most 0. However, total
hunger is invariant under the hunger game process; since the initial hunger vector was 0 with total
hunger 0, total hunger must still be equal to 0. This equality case requires that xH = 0, implying
x is a multiple of π. Since xv = pv and p = nπ, we deduce x = p.
   Thus the hunger state is xH = 0, so 0 is recurrent. Moreover, the number of steps needed to
return to 0 is the sum of the entries of x = p = nπ, which is n, as claimed.                     
   From empirical observations, we conjecture that the periods of all cycles in the hunger game for
a given chain are equal, and specifically are equal to the n that was shown in Proposition 7.3 to be
the period of the hunger vector 0.
Conjecture 7.4. The period of every cycle in the hunger game for a given finite rational irreducible
Markov chain is the least common denominator of the stationary probabilities of the Markov chain.
   Visually, Conjecture 7.4 applied to the Markov chain from Example 7.1 corresponds to the
observation that each color in Fig. 10 consists of the same number of congruent pieces, namely 18.
   The basin of attraction in Fig. 10 tiles the hyperplane Z, as illustrated in Fig. 11; in particular,
one can observe that its concave boundaries fit complementarily with the opposite side of the basin
of attraction. The following conjecture formalizes this observation and poses it for general Markov
chains.
Conjecture 7.5. For a finite rational irreducible Markov chain, the basin of attraction tiles the
hyperplane Z by translation, and the translation vectors that relate each tile with each other forms
an (n − 1)-dimensional sublattice in Z of Rn with basis vectors H1 − H2 , H2 − H3 , . . . , Hn−1 − Hn .
  In fact, Conjecture 7.5 implies Conjecture 7.4, as seen in the following proposition.
Proposition 7.6. For a finite rational irreducible Markov chain, if the basin of attraction tiles
the hyperplane Z with lattice of translation vectors generated by H1 − H2 , . . . , Hn−1 − Hn , then
the period of any cycle under the hunger game process is the least common denominator of the
stationary probabilities of the Markov chain.
Proof. By using Proposition 7.3, it suffices to show that the tiling condition implies that all periods
in the basin of attraction are the same. Suppose the lattice in the statement of the proposition is L.
We say that two points in Z are equivalent mod L if they differ by an element of L, and we write
22                                   RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP




         Figure 11. The basin of attraction from Example 7.1 tiles the (hyper)plane Z.

the set of equivalence classes as Z/L. Now view the hunger game process, which naturally acts
upon Z, as acting instead on Z/L, where the tiling condition implies that the basin of attraction
can serve as a set of coset representatives for Z/L. Initially this might seem like nonsense since the
choice of which state to fire depends on inequalities relating the elements of the hunger vector and
these inequalities get washed out when we mod out by L, but all rows of H are equivalent mod
L, i.e., each row of H has the same image under the projection map Z → Z/L, so the choice of
which state gets fired is moot; we may as well suppose that the H1 coset is added at each stage,
as if state 1 were firing repeatedly. Using the basin of attraction as a set of coset representatives
and observing that a vector inside the basin must stay within the basin under the hunger game
process, we find the hunger game process on Z/L is equivalent to the original hunger game on Z
for any vector in the basin. If the zero vector 0 has period p, then pH1 = 0 in Z/L. Then let q
be the minimum of the set of positive integers q 0 such that q 0 H1 = 0 in Z/L. After q steps of the
hunger game process, every vector in the basin thus returns to itself, so we find p = q and every
vector in the basin of attraction must have period p, which completes the proof.                    
   We provide a partial result towards Conjecture 7.5, proving that the basin of attraction translated
under the stated lattice covers the hyperplane Z; to prove Conjecture 7.5 and thus Conjecture 7.4,
it remains to show this covering has no overlap.
Proposition 7.7. For a finite rational irreducible Markov chain, let L ⊂ Z be the sublattice in Z
of Rn with basis vectors H1 − H2 , . . . , Hn−1 − Hn . Then for any vector h ∈ Z, there exists a u ∈ L
such that h − u lies in the basin of attraction.
Proof. As h is pre-periodic, after some finite number of steps it will reach some vector in the basin,
say after t0 steps. Additionally, every vector in the basin stays in the basin under the hunger game
process, so for all integers t ≥ t0 , applying the hunger game process t times to h yields a vector
in the basin. Let p be the least common denominator of the stationary probabilities of the unique
stationary distribution π of our Markov chain, and fix t to be the minimum nonnegative integer
≥ t0 such that t is a multiple of p, say kp for positive integer k. Then applying the hunger game
process t times to h yields a vector x ∈ Z in the basin of attraction, say after firing state i a total of
                                    A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                                        23

vi times for each i. Constructing vector v from these values, as x was reached after firing h a total
of t times, we have x = h + vH and v · 1 = t = kp. Notice that pπ is the primitive integer vector
in the direction of the stationary distribution, so we have pπH = 0. Hence x = h + (v − kpπ)H,
where (v − kpπ) · 1 = 0. As L = {wH | w · 1 = 0}, letting u = (kpπ − v)H ∈ L yields x = h − u,
as desired.                                                                                        



                                           8. Comments
   The hunger game achieves high fidelity (that is, low discrepancy) for the frequency with which a
specified state occurs, but not for the frequency with which two specified states occur in succession;
the rotor-router game achieves fidelity for the frequency with which two specified states occur in
succession, but not for the frequency with which three specified states occur in succession. One could
use a block-encoding trick (with new states encoding pairs of old states) to construct a simulation
scheme that ensures fidelity for the frequency with which three specified (old) states occur in
succession, but at a price: the resulting rotor-router network will have more rotors, and hence the
quantities that upper-bound discrepancy in [8] will be larger. Indeed, consider derandomization of
a fair coin process. De Bruijn [3] showed that for each k, there is a cyclic word of length 2k that
contains each possible bit-string of length k exactly once; it follows that if we let W be the infinite
word associated with this cyclic word, then for each bit-string w of length k, the unnormalized
discrepancy D(w, n), defined as n/2k minus the number of apperances of w in the first n + k − 1
positions of W , is bounded. On the other hand, one cannot find a single infinite word W that
accomplishes this task simultaneously for all k, since for example if w is a string containing one or
more 1s, the boundedness of D(w, n) is inconsistent with the occurrence of arbitrarily long strings
of 0’s.
   We propose that a sort of trade-off principle is at work here: the more numerical characteristics of
a random process that we attempt to mimic in a deterministic simulation, the worse our mimicry will
be, if our criterion of merit is the rate at which the simulation’s numerical characteristics converge
to the limiting values of the corresponding numerical characteristics of the random process. In this
context, one sometimes sees the words “psuedorandom” and “quasirandom”, where a pseudorandom
simulation is expected to pass “all” tests of randomness while a quasirandom simulation is expected
only to pass certain specified tests. It is reasonable to expect that the more asymptotic tests of
randomness a quasirandom simulation is required to pass, the worse the convergence will be. Indeed,
for certain tests of randomness, the previous assertion is almost a tautology; for if (say) a random
                                                                                                  √
sequence of 0s and 1s had its running average approach 1/2 with discrepancy smaller than ± N ,
that rapidity of convergence would ipso facto demonstrate negative correlation between the bits,
constituting failure of a correlational test of randomness.
   Applying this trade-off principle in the reverse direction, it seems reasonable to hope that by
relaxing our stringency, and requiring a quasirandom simulation scheme to pass fewer tests for
randomness, we enable it to do a better job with the tests that it is required to pass; that is, we
make faster convergence possible. Hence, the delocalized firing mechanism of the hunger game, by
no longer preserving the frequency with which two specified states occur in succession, may allow
the hunger game to outperform the rotor-router in convergence.
24                                       RUPERT LI AND JAMES PROPP

     For example, consider the Markov chain with transition matrix
                                                       
                                           1−q      q
                                             q     1−q
with q small, as shown in Fig. 12 . Then under rotor-routing the itinerary of the chip will be

                                                         q
                                    1−q         v1               v2      1−q
                                                         q

         Figure 12. A Markov chain where the hunger game outperforms the rotor-router
         in convergence

periodic with repeating pattern 1, 1, . . . , 1, 2, 2, . . . , 2, while under the hunger game the itinerary
will simply alternate between 1 and 2, yielding lower discrepancy for the visit-frequencies of the
two states.


                                             Acknowledgments
  The authors thank Grant Barkley, Darij Grinberg, Sam Hopkins, Lionel Levine, Alex Postnikov,
and Tom Roby for various helpful suggestions made during the course of this research. We are
grateful to the anonymous referees who made many suggestions that improved this article.


                                                  References
 [1] Anders Björner, László Lovász, and Peter W. Shor. Chip-firing games on graphs. European Journal of Combi-
     natorics, 12(4):283–291, 1991.
 [2] Scott Corry and David Perkinson. Divisors and sandpiles. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2018.
 [3] Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn. A combinatorial problem. Proc. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie V. Wetenschap-
     pen, 49:758–764, 1946.
 [4] Deepak Dhar. Self-organized critical state of sandpile automation models. Physical Review Letters, 64(23):2837,
     1990.
 [5] Arthur Engel. The probabilistic abacus. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 6(1):1–22, 1975.
 [6] Arthur Engel. Why does the probabilistic abacus work? Educational Studies in Mathematics, 7(1-2):59–69, 1976.
 [7] Alexander E. Holroyd, Lionel Levine, Karola Mészáros, Yuyal Peres, James Propp, and David B. Wilson. Chip-
     firing and rotor-routing on directed graphs. In In and out of equilibrium 2, pages 331–364. Springer, 2008.
 [8] Alexander E. Holroyd and James Propp. Rotor walks and Markov chains. Algorithmic Probability and Combi-
     natorics, 520:105–126, 2010.
 [9] John G. Kemeny and J. Laurie Snell. Finite Markov chains (1983 Edition). Springer-Verlag, 1960.
[10] Michael Kleber. Goldbug variations. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 27(1):55–63, 2005.
[11] Caroline J. Klivans. The Mathematics of Chip-firing. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2018.
[12] James R. Norris. Markov chains, volume 2 of Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics.
     Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[13] Vyatcheslav B. Priezzhev, Deepak Dhar, Abhishek Dhar, and Supriya Krishnamurthy. Eulerian walkers as a
     model of self-organized criticality. Physical Review Letters, 77(25):5079, 1996.
                              A GREEDY CHIP-FIRING GAME                   25

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Email address: rupertli@mit.edu

University of Massachusetts Lowell, Department of Mathematical Sciences
Email address: jamespropp@gmail.com
