                                                  STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES

                                                             JONATHAN ARIEL BARMAK AND ELIAS GABRIEL MINIAN


                                                  Abstract. We introduce the theory of strong homotopy types of simplicial complexes.
arXiv:0907.2954v1 [math.GT] 17 Jul 2009




                                                  Similarly to classical simple homotopy theory, the strong homotopy types can be de-
                                                  scribed by elementary moves. An elementary move in this setting is called a strong
                                                  collapse and it is a particular kind of simplicial collapse. The advantage of using strong
                                                  collapses is the existence and uniqueness of cores and their relationship with the nerves of
                                                  the complexes. From this theory we derive new results for studying simplicial collapsibil-
                                                  ity with a different point of view. We analyze vertex-transitive simplicial G-actions and
                                                  prove a particular case of the Evasiveness conjecture for simplicial complexes. Moreover,
                                                  we reduce the general conjecture to the class of minimal complexes. We also strengthen
                                                  a result of V. Welker on the barycentric subdivision of collapsible complexes. We obtain
                                                  this and other results on collapsibility of polyhedra by means of the characterization of
                                                  the different notions of collapses in terms of finite topological spaces.




                                                                                    1. Introduction
                                             The notion of simplicial collapse, introduced by J.H.C. Whitehead in the late thirties
                                          [25], is a fundamental tool in algebraic topology and in combinatorial geometry [5, 9].
                                          Collapsible polyhedra are the centre of various famous problems, perhaps the most relevant
                                          of them being the Zeeman Conjecture [26]. Although an elementary simplicial collapse
                                          is very simple to describe, it is not easy to determine whether a simplicial complex is
                                          collapsible. In fact, the Zeeman Conjecture, which states that K × I is collapsible for
                                          any contractible polyhedron K of dimension 2, is still an open problem. One of the main
                                          difficulties when studying collapsibility, or simple homotopy theory in general, is the non-
                                          uniqueness of what we call cores. A core of a complex K, in this setting, is a minimal
                                          element in the poset of all subcomplexes which expand to K. For instance, there exist
                                          collapsible complexes which collapse to nontrivial subcomplexes with no free faces.
                                             In this article we introduce and develope the theory of strong homotopy types of simpli-
                                          cial complexes, which has interesting applications to problems of collapsibility. Similarly
                                          to the case of simple homotopy types, the strong homotopy types can be described in terms
                                          of elementary moves. A vertex v of a simplicial complex K is called dominated if its link
                                          is a simplicial cone. An elementary strong collapse K ց ցe K r v consists of removing from
                                          a simplicial complex K the open star of a dominated vertex v. Surprisingly the notion of
                                          strong homotopy equivalence also arises from the concept of contiguity classes. It is not
                                          hard to see that a strong collapse is a particular case of a classical collapse. This new
                                          kind of collapse is much easier to handle for various reasons: the existence and unique-
                                          ness of cores, the fact that strong homotopy equivalences between minimal complexes are
                                          isomorphisms and the relationship between this theory and the nerves of the complexes.
                                             2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57Q10, 55U05, 55P15, 55P91, 06A06, 05E25.
                                             Key words and phrases. Simplicial complexes, simple homotopy types, collapses, nerves, finite spaces,
                                          posets, non-evasiveness, simplicial actions.
                                             The authors’ research is partially supported by Conicet and by grant ANPCyT PICT 17-38280.
                                                                                               1
2                               J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


A finite simplicial complex K is minimal if it has no dominated vertices and a core of a
finite simplicial complex K in this context is a minimal subcomplex K0 ⊆ K such that
K ց ց K0 . Minimal complexes appeared already in the literature under the name of taut
complexes [10]. B. Grünbaum investigated the relationship between minimal complexes
and nerves, but apparently he was unaware of the significant relationship between these
notions and collapsibility. We will show that, in contrast to the classical situation, in this
context all the cores of a complex K are isomorphic and one can reach the core of a com-
plex by iterating the nerve operation. This provides a new method to study collapsibility
from a different viewpoint.
   In order to investigate the difference between simplicial collapses and strong collapses,
in Section 5 we relax the notion of strong collapse and define inductively divers notions of
collapses which lie between the two concepts. In this way, the notion of non-evasiveness
appears naturally in our context. The concept of non-evasiveness, commonly used in
combinatorics and combinatorial geometry, is motivated by problems in graph theory
[4, 12, 14, 15, 24]. A non-evasive simplicial complex is collapsible (in the classical sense)
but the converse is not true. Our approach is slightly different from the previous treatments
of this subject, since we are more interested in understanding the difference between the
various notions of collapses from a geometric point of view. One of the most significant
questions related to this concept is the so-called Evasiveness conjecture for simplicial
complexes which asserts that a non-evasive simplicial complex endowed with a vertex-
transitive action of some group G is a simplex. The conjecture is still open for non-evasive
complexes but it is known to be false for collapsible complexes in general [14, 15].
   A simplicial complex K is vertex-homogeneous if for any pair of vertices v, w ∈ K, there
exists an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(K) such that ϕ(v) = w. We will show that a strong
collapsible complex which is vertex-homogeneous is a simplex. This proves a particular
case of the Evasiveness conjecture mentioned above and sheds some light on the general
situation. Moreover, we will see that the square nerve N 2 (K) of any vertex-homogeneous
complex K is its core and that any vertex-homogeneous complex is isomorphic to an n-th
multiple of its core. As an easy and direct consequence of these results, one obtains that
any vertex-homogeneous complex with a prime number of vertices is minimal or a simplex.
One of the main results that we prove in this direction asserts that the core of a vertex-
homogeneous and non-evasive complex is also vertex-homogeneous and non-evasive. In
view of this result, one derives that the study of the Evasiveness conjecture for simplicial
complexes can be reduced to the class of minimal (and non-evasive) complexes.
   The theory of strong homotopy types for polyhedra is motivated by the homotopy
theory of finite topological spaces. One can associate to any finite simplicial complex K,
a finite T0 -space X (K) which corresponds to the poset of simplices of K. Conversely, one
can associate to a given finite T0 -space X the simplicial complex K(X) of its non-empty
chains. In [2] we have introduced the notion of collapse in the setting of finite spaces and
proved that a collapse X ց Y between finite spaces induces a collapse K(X) ց K(Y )
between their associated simplicial complexes and a simplicial collapse K ց L induces a
collapse between the associated finite spaces. One advantage of working with finite spaces
is that the elementary collapses in this context are very simple to handle and describe:
they consist of removing a single point of the space, which is called a weak point. In this
paper we extend these results to the non-evasive case and the strong homotopy case. We
define the notion of non-evasive collapse in the setting of finite spaces and prove that this
notion corresponds exactly to its simplicial version by means of the functors X and K.
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                3


Analogously we prove that the concept of strong homotopy equivalence in the simplicial
context corresponds to the notion of homotopy equivalence in the setting of finite spaces.
We use these results on finite spaces to derive results on polyhedra: we prove that a
simplicial complex K is strong collapsible if and only if its barycentric subdivsion K ′ is
strong collapsible and that the join KL of two simplicial complexes is strong collapsible
if and only if K or L is strong collapsible. As another direct consequence of our results
one can easily deduce a stronger version of a known result of V. Welker on the barycentric
subdivision of collapsible complexes [24]. Indeed, we show that a simplicial collapse K ց L
determines a 1-collapse K ′ ց1 L′ . In particular if K is collapsible, K ′ is 1-collapsible and
therefore non-evasive. The converse of this result is still an open problem but it holds in
the case that K ′ is strong collapsible.

                               2. Strong homotopy types
   We recall the notion of contiguity classes of simplicial maps. A standard reference for
this is [21]. Two simplicial maps ϕ, ψ : K → L are said to be contiguous if ϕ(σ) ∪ ψ(σ)
is a simplex of L for every σ ∈ K. The equivalence classes of the equivalence relation
generated by contiguity are called contiguity classes. Contiguous maps are homotopic at
the level of geometric realizations, but this notion is strictly stronger than usual homotopy.
The difference between strong homotopy types and the usual notion of homotopy types
lies in this distiction between contiguity classes and homotopic maps.
   Given a simplicial complex K and a simplex σ ∈ K, the (closed) star of σ will be
denoted by stK (σ). It is the subcomplex of simplices τ such that τ ∪ σ is a simplex of K.
The link lkK (σ) is the subcomplex of st(σ) of simplices disjoint from σ. If K and L are
two disjoint complexes, the join K ∗ L (or KL) is the complex whose simplices are those
of K, those of L and unions of simplices of K and L. A simplicial cone is the join aK of
a complex K and vertex a not in K.
   All the simplicial complexes we deal with are assumed to be finite. We will write
“complex” or “simplicial complex” instead of “finite simplicial complex”.
Definition 2.1. Let K be a complex and let v ∈ K be a vertex. We denote by K r v
the full subcomplex of K spanned by the vertices different from v (the deletion of the
vertex v). We say that there is an elementary strong collapse from K to K r v if lkK (v)
is a simplicial cone v ′ L. In this case we say that v is dominated (by v ′ ) and we denote
K ց ցe K r v. There is a strong collapse from a complex K to a subcomplex L if there
exists a sequence of elementary strong collapses that starts in K and ends in L. In this
case we write K ց  ց L. The inverse of a strong collapse is a strong expansion and two
complexes K and L have the same strong homotopy type if there is a sequence of strong
collapses and strong expansions that starts in K and ends in L.

Remark 2.2. A vertex v is dominated by a vertex v ′ 6= v if and only if every maximal
simplex that contains v also contains v ′ .
Remark 2.3. It is not hard to see that isomorphic complexes have the same strong homo-
topy type. If K is a complex and v ∈ K is a vertex, we can consider for a vertex v ′ not in
K the complex L = K + (v ′ stK (v)) = (K r v)+ (v ′ vlkK (v)). Since lkL (v ′ ) = vlkK (v), then
Lց ց K. Moreover, by symmetry L ց     ց L r v = K.  e One can use this process repeatedly
to show that isomorphic complexes are strong homotopy equivalent.
4                                 J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN

                      v



                             v´                                 v´




       Figure 1. An elementary strong collapse. The vertex v is dominated by v ′ .

   The notion of strong collapse is related to the usual notion of collapse. Recall that if
K is a complex and σ is a free face of τ (i.e. τ is the unique simplex of K having σ as
a proper face) then we say that there is an elementary collapse from K to K r {σ, τ }.
A collapse K ց L from a complex K to a subcomplex L (or an expansion L ր K) is a
sequence of elementary collapses from K to L. Two complexes are said to have the same
simple homotopy type if there is a sequence of collapses and expansions from one to the
other. If K and L have the same simple homotopy type, we write Kց L.
   It is not hard to prove that if K and L are subcomplexes of a same complex, then
K + L ց L if and only if K ց K ∩ L. A complex is collapsible if it collapses to a point.
For instance, simplicial cones are collapsible. It is easy to prove that a complex K is
collapsible if and only if the simplicial cone aK collapses to its base K.
Remark 2.4. If v ∈ K is dominated, lk(v) is collapsible and therefore st(v) = vlk(v) ց
lk(v) = st(v) ∩ (K r v). Then K = st(v) + (K r v) ց K r v. Thus, the usual notion of
collapse is weaker than the notion of strong collapse.
  If two simplicial maps ϕ, ψ : K → L lie in the same contiguity class, we will write
ϕ ∼ ψ. It is easy to see that if ϕ1 , ϕ2 : K → L and ψ1 , ψ2 : L → M are simplicial maps
such that ϕ1 ∼ ϕ2 and ψ1 ∼ ψ2 , then ψ1 ϕ1 ∼ ψ2 ϕ2 .
Definition 2.5. A simplicial map ϕ : K → L is a strong equivalence if there exists
ψ : L → K such that ψϕ ∼ 1K and ϕψ ∼ 1L . If there is a strong equivalence ϕ : K → L
we write K ∼ L.
    The relation ∼ is clearly an equivalence relation.
Definition 2.6. A complex K is a minimal complex if it has no dominated vertices.
Proposition 2.7. Let K be a minimal complex and let ϕ : K → K be simplicial map
which lies in the same contiguity class as the identity. Then ϕ is the identity.
Proof. We may assume that ϕ is contiguous to 1K . Let v ∈ K and let σ ∈ K be a
maximal simplex such that v ∈ σ. Then ϕ(σ) ∪ σ is a simplex, and by the maximality of
σ, ϕ(v) ∈ ϕ(σ) ∪ σ = σ. Therefore every maximal simplex which contains v, also contains
ϕ(v). Hence, ϕ(v) = v, since K is minimal.                                           
Corollary 2.8. A strong equivalence between minimal complexes is an isomorphism.
Proposition 2.9. Let K be a complex and v ∈ K a vertex dominated by v ′ . Then, the
inclusion i : K r v ֒→ K is a strong equivalence. In particular, if two complexes K and L
have the same strong homotopy type, then K ∼ L.
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                 5


Proof. Define a vertex map r : K → K r v which is the identity on K r v and such
that r(v) = v ′ . If σ ∈ K is a simplex with v ∈ σ, consider σ ′ ⊇ σ a maximal simplex.
Therefore v ′ ∈ σ ′ and r(σ) = σ ∪ {v ′ } r {v} ⊆ σ ′ is a simplex of K r v. Moreover
ir(σ) ∪ σ = σ ∪ {v ′ } ⊆ σ ′ is a simplex of K. This proves that r is simplicial and that ir is
contiguous to 1K . Therefore, i is a strong equivalence.                                     
Definition 2.10. A core of a complex K is a minimal subcomplex K0 ⊆ K such that
K ցց K0 .
Theorem 2.11. Every complex has a core and it is unique up to isomorphism. Two
complexes have the same strong homotopy type if and only if their cores are isomorphic.
Proof. A core of a complex can be obtained by removing dominated points one at the
time. If K1 and K2 are two cores of K, they have the same strong homotopy type and by
Proposition 2.9, K1 ∼ K2 . Since they are minimal, by Corollary 2.8 they are isomorphic.
   Let K, L be two complexes. If they have the same strong homotopy type, then also
their cores K0 and L0 do. As above, we conclude that K0 and L0 are isomorphic.
   Conversely, if K0 and L0 are isomorphic, they have the same strong homotopy type by
Remark 2.3. Therefore K and L have the same strong homotopy type.                     
  If K and L are two complexes such that K ∼ L and K0 ⊆ K, L0 ⊆ L are their cores,
then K0 ∼ L0 and therefore K0 and L0 are isomorphic. Hence, we deduce the following
Corollary 2.12. Two complexes K and L have the same strong homotopy type if and
only if K ∼ L.
Example 2.13. The homogeneous 2-complex of Figure 2 is collapsible, moreover it is
non-evasive (see Section 5). However, it is a minimal complex and therefore it does not
have the strong homotopy type of a point.




             Figure 2. A collapsible complex which is not strong collapsible.

     A complex is said to be strong collapsible if it strong collapses to one of its vertices or,
equivalently, if it has the strong homotopy type of a point.
     The barycentric subdivision K ′ of a complex K has as vertices the barycenters σ̂ of the
simplices of K and the simplices {σ̂0 , σ̂1 , . . . , σ̂r } of K ′ correspond to chains σ0 ⊆ σ1 ⊆
. . . ⊆ σr . It is well known that barycentric subdivisions preserve the simple homotopy type.
In fact, stellar subdivisions do. In contrast to the case of simple homotopy, a complex and
its barycentric subdivision need not have the same strong homotopy type. For example,
the boundary of a 2-simplex and its barycentric subdivision are minimal non-isomorphic
6                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


complexes, and therefore they do not have the same strong homotopy type. However, we
will show that a complex K is strong collapsible if and only if its barycentric subdivision
is strong collapsible. Note that minimality is not preserved by barycentric subdivisions.
In fact K ′ is minimal if and only if K has no free faces, or equivalently if K ′ has no free
faces. If σ is a free face of τ in K, then σ̂ is dominated by τ̂ in K ′ .
   The following result relates the notion of strong equivalence with the concept of simple
homotopy equivalence. For definitions and results on simple homotopy equivalences, the
reader is referred to [5].
Proposition 2.14. Strong equivalences are simple homotopy equivalences.
Proof. Let ϕ : K → L be a strong equivalence. Let K0 be a core of K and L0 a core
of L. Then, the inclusion i : K0 ֒→ K is a strong equivalence and there exists a strong
equivalence r : L → L0 which is a homotopy inverse of the inclusion L0 ֒→ L. Since
K0 and L0 are minimal complexes, the strong equivalence rϕi is an isomorphism and in
particular |rϕi| is a simple homotopy equivalences. By Remark 2.4, |i| and |r| are also
simple homotopy equivalences, and then so is |ϕ|.                                     
  It is not known whether K ∗ L is collapsible only if one of K or L is (see [24]), but the
analogous result is true for strong collapsibility.
Proposition 2.15. Let K and L be two complexes. Then, K ∗ L is strong collapsible if
and only if K or L is strong collapsible.
Proof. Suppose v is a dominated vertex of K. Then lkK (v) is a cone and therefore
lkK∗L (v) = lkK (v) ∗ L is a cone. Hence, v is also dominated in K ∗ L. Thus, if K
strong collapses to a vertex v0 , K ∗ L ց
                                        ց v0 L ցց v0 .
   Conversely, assume K ∗ L is strong collapsible. Let v ∈ K ∗ L be a dominated point
and suppose without loss of generality that v ∈ K. Then lkK∗L (v) = lkK (v) ∗ L is a cone.
Therefore lkK (v) is a cone or L is a cone. If L is a cone, it is strong collapsible and we
are done. Suppose then that lkK (v) is a cone. Since (K r v) ∗ L = (K ∗ L) r v is strong
collapsible, by induction K r v or L is strong collapsible and since K ց ց K r v, K or L
is strong collapsible.                                                                    

                              3. The nerve of a complex
   We introduce an application which transforms a complex in another complex with the
same homotopy type. This construction was previously studied by B. Grünbaum in [10]
(see also [14]). We arrived to this concept independently when studying Čech cohomology
of finite topological spaces (see [1]). This construction was already known to preserve the
homotopy type of a complex, but we will show that when we apply the construction twice,
one obtains a complex with the same strong homotopy type. Moreover, the nerve can be
used to obtain the core of a complex.
Definition 3.1. Let K be a complex. The nerve N (K) of K is a complex whose vertices
are the maximal simplices of K and whose simplices are the sets of maximal simplices of K
with nonempty intersection. Given n ≥ 2, we define recursively N n (K) = N (N n−1 (K)).
   A proof of the fact that K is homotopy equivalent to its nerve can be given invoking a
Theorem of Dowker [6]. Let V be the set of vertices of K and S the set of its maximal
simplices. Define the relation R ⊆ V × S by vRσ if v ∈ σ. Following Dowker, one can
                     STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                   7


consider two complexes. The simplices of the first one are the finite subsets of V which
are related with a same element of S. This complex coincides with the original complex
K. The second complex has as simplices the finite subsets of S which are related with a
same element of V . This complex is N (K). The Theorem of Dowker concludes that |K|
and |N (K)| have the same homotopy type.
Example 3.2. Let K be the complex on the left in Figure 3 with five maximal simplices
σ1 , σ2 , σ3 , σ4 and σ5 . Its nerve N (K) is the complex on the right whose vertices are the
maximal simplices of K.




               s1                                                                 s4
                                                                 s3
                         s2

                                           s5

                s3                                                         s2
                              s4                                                           s5
                                                            s1



               Figure 3. A complex on the left and its nerve on the right.



  If N r (K) = ∗ for some r ≥ 1, then |K| is contractible. But there are contractible
complexes such that N r (K) is not a point for any r. For instance, if K is the complex of
Example 2.13, N (K) has more vertices than K, but N 2 (K) is isomorphic to K. Therefore
N r (K) 6= ∗ for every r.
  We will see that, in fact, there is a strong collapse from K to a complex isomorphic to
N 2 (K) and that there exists r such that N r (K) = ∗ if and only if K is strong collapsible.
Lemma 3.3. Let L be a full subcomplex of a complex K such that every vertex of K which
is not in L is dominated by some vertex in L. Then K ցց L.
Proof. Let v be a vertex of K which is not in L. By hypothesis, v is dominated and then
K ց ց K r v. Now suppose w is a vertex of K r v which is not in L. Then, the link
lkK (w) in K is a simplicial cone aM with a ∈ L. Therefore, the link lkKrv (w) in K r v
is a(M r v). By induction K r v ց  ց L and then K ց ց L.                             
Proposition 3.4. Let K be a simplicial complex. Then, there exists a complex L isomor-
phic to N 2 (K) such that K ց
                            ց L.
Proof. A vertex of N 2 (K) is a maximal family Σ = {σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σr } of maximal simplices
of K with nonempty intersection. Consider a vertex map ϕ : N 2 (K) → K such that
        T
        r
ϕ(Σ) ∈    σi . This is a simplicial map for if Σ0 , Σ1 , . . . , Σr constitute a simplex of N 2 (K),
        i=0
then there is a common element σ in all of them, which is a maximal simplex of K.
8                                 J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


Therefore ϕ(Σi ) ∈ σ for every 0 ≤ i ≤ r and then {ϕ(Σ1 ), ϕ(Σ2 ), . . . , ϕ(Σr )} is a simplex
of K.
    The vertex map ϕ is injective. If ϕ(Σ1 ) = v = ϕ(Σ2 ) for Σ1 = {σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σr },
Σ2 = {τ0 , τ1 , . . . , τt }, then v ∈ σi for every 0 ≤ i ≤ r and v ∈ τi for every 0 ≤ i ≤ t.
Therefore Σ1 ∪ Σ2 is a family of maximal simplices of K with nonempty intersection. By
the maximality of Σ1 and Σ2 , Σ1 = Σ1 ∪ Σ2 = Σ2 .
    Suppose Σ0 , Σ1 , . . . , Σr are vertices of N 2 (K) such that v0 = ϕ(Σ0 ), v1 = ϕ(Σ1 ), . . . ,
vr = ϕ(Σr ) constitute a simplex of K. Let σ by a maximal simplex of K which contains
v0 , v1 , . . . , vr . Then, by the maximality of the families Σi , σ ∈ Σi for every i and therefore
{Σ0 , Σ1 , . . . , Σr } is a simplex of N 2 (K).
    This proves that L = ϕ(N 2 (K)) is a full subcomplex of K which is isomorphic to
   2
N (K).
    Now, suppose v is a vertex of K which is not in L. Let Σ be the set of maximal simplices
of K which contain v. The intersection of the elements of Σ is nonempty, but Σ could be
not maximal. Let Σ′ ⊇ Σ be a maximal family of maximal simplices of K with nonempty
intersection. Then v ′ = ϕ(Σ′ ) ∈ L and if σ is a maximal simplex of K which contains
v, then σ ∈ Σ ⊆ Σ′ . Hence, v ′ ∈ σ. Therefore v is dominated by v ′ . By Lemma 3.3,
K ց  ց L.                                                                                         
Example 3.5. In the complex K of Figure 4 there are, according to the previous Propo-
sition, two possible ways of regarding N 2 (K) as a subcomplex of K. One of these is the
full subcomplex with vertices a, b, c and d.

                                      d



                                                           c


                             a


                                                b

                          Figure 4. N 2 (K) as a subcomplex of K.


   The nerve can be used to characterize minimal complexes as the following result shows
(cf. [10] Theorem 9).
Lemma 3.6. A complex K is minimal if and only if N 2 (K) is isomorphic to K.
Proof. By Proposition 3.4, there exists a complex L isomorphic to N 2 (K) such that
K ց ց L. Therefore, if K is minimal, L = K.
   If K is not minimal, there exists a vertex v dominated by other vertex v ′ . If v is
contained in each element of a maximal family Σ of maximal simplices of K with nonempty
intersection, then the same occurs with v ′ . Therefore, we can define the map ϕ of the proof
of Proposition 3.4 so that v is not in its image. Therefore, L = ϕ(N 2 (K)) is isomorphic
to N 2 (K) and has less vertices than K. Thus, N 2 (K) and K cannot be isomorphic. 
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                 9


  The sequence K, N 2 (K), N 4 (K), N 6 (K), . . . is a decreasing sequence of subcomplexes of
K (up to isomorphism). Therefore, there exists n ≥ 1 such that N 2n (K) and N 2n+2 (K)
are isomorphic. Then K strongly collapses to a subcomplex L which is isomorphic to
N 2n (K) and which is minimal. Thus, we have proved the following
Proposition 3.7. Given a complex K, there exists n ≥ 1 such that N n (K) is isomorphic
to the core of K.
Theorem 3.8. Let K be a complex. Then, K is strong collapsible if and only if there
exists n ≥ 1 such that N n (K) is a point.
Proof. If K is strong collapsible, its core is a point and then, there exists n such that
N n (K) = ∗ by the previous proposition. If N n (K) = ∗ for some n, then N n+1 (K) is
also a point. Therefore there exists an even positive integer r such that N r (K) = ∗, and
K ց ց ∗ by Proposition 3.4.                                                              

                              4. Finite topological spaces
   The theory of strong homotopy types was motivated by the homotopy theory of finite
spaces developed by R.E. Stong in [22]. In this section we recall some basic concepts and
results on finite spaces and we establish a correspondence between strong homotopy types
of finite simplicial complexes and homotopy types of finite spaces. For a comprehensive
treatment of this subject we refer the reader to [1, 2, 3, 16, 17, 19, 22].
   In general, a complex K and its barycentric subdivision K ′ do not have the same strong
homotopy type. We will use the relationship between strong homotopy types of complexes
and finite spaces to prove that K is strong collapsible if and only if K ′ is strong collapsible.
Finally, we prove an analogous result for finite spaces.

   Given a finite topological space X, for each x ∈ X we denote by Ux the minimal open set
containing x. The relation x ≤ y if x ∈ Uy defines a preorder on the set X, that is to say a
reflexive and transitive relation. If X is in addition a T0 -space (i.e. for every pair of points
there exists an open set which contains one and only one of them), ≤ is antisymmetric.
This establishes a correspondence between finite T0 -spaces and finite posets. Moreover,
continuous maps correspond to order-preserving maps.




                                       b
                             a                              a             c



                                                                     b
                                      c




                    Figure 5. A finite T0 -space of three points and the
                        Hasse diagram of the corresponding poset.
10                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


   Given two finite T0 -spaces X, Y , we denote by Y X the space of maps with the compact-
open topology. This finite T0 -space corresponds to the set of order-preserving maps X → Y
with the pointwise ordering, i.e. f ≤ g if f (x) ≤ g(x) for every x ∈ X. The following
result characterizes homotopic maps between finite spaces in terms of posets.
Proposition 4.1. Let f, g : X → Y be two maps between finite spaces. Then f ≃ g if
and only if there is a fence f = f0 ≤ f1 ≥ f2 ≤ . . . fn = g. Moreover, if A ⊆ X, then
f ≃ g rel A if and only if there exists a fence f = f0 ≤ f1 ≥ f2 ≤ . . . fn = g such that
fi |A = f |A for every 0 ≤ i ≤ n.
   If x is a point in a finite T0 -space X, Fx denotes the set of points which are greater
than or equal to x or, in other words, the closure of {x}. Ûx = Ux r {x} is the set of
points which are strictly smaller than x and F̂x = Fx r {x}. The link Ĉx of a point x in a
finite T0 -space X is the subspace Ûx ∪ F̂x of points comparable with x and distinct from
x. Finally, we denote Cx = Ux ∪ Fx the set of points comparable with x.
Definition 4.2. A point x ∈ X is a beat point if Ûx has a maximum or if F̂x has a
minimum. In the first case, x is called a down beat point and in the second, an up beat
point. In other words, x is a beat point if it covers exactly one element or if it is covered
by exactly one element.
Definition 4.3. If x is a beat point of a finite T0 -space X, we say that there is an
elementary strong collapse from X to X r {x}. There is a strong collapse from X to a
subspace Y (or a strong expansion from Y to X) if there exists a sequence of elementary
strong collapses starting in X and finishing in Y . We denote this situation by X ց
                                                                                  ց Y or
Y ր ր X.
   It is not hard to prove that if x ∈ X is a beat point, then X r{x} is a strong deformation
retract of X. Therefore, strong expansions of finite spaces are strong deformation retracts.
   A finite T0 -space is said to be a minimal finite space if it has no beat points. A core of
a finite space X is a strong deformation retract of X which is a minimal finite space. The
following results are due to Stong [22].
Theorem 4.4 (Stong). Let X be a minimal finite space. A map f : X → X is homotopic
to the identity if and only if f = 1X .
     Every finite space has a core. Moreover we have the following
Corollary 4.5 (Stong). A homotopy equivalence between minimal finite spaces is a home-
omorphism. In particular the core of a finite space is unique up to homeomorphism and
two finite spaces are homotopy equivalent if and only if they have homeomorphic cores.
   Note that the core of a finite space X is the smallest space homotopy equivalent to X.
Thus, X is contractible if and only if X ց ց ∗.
   From Corollary 4.5 one deduces that two finite T0 -spaces are homotopy equivalent if
and only if one of them can be obtained from the other just by removing and adding beat
points. Thus, the notion of strong homotopy types of finite spaces that would follow from
the notion of strong collapse coincides with the usual notion of homotopy types.
   These results motivated the definition of strong homotopy types of simplicial complexes
and the results proved in Section 2. The relationship between both concepts will be given
in Theorems 4.13 and 4.14.
                     STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                 11


  We exhibit here a simple generalization of Stong’s results for finite topological pairs
which uses ideas very similar to the original. As a consequence we prove that strong
expansions of finite spaces coincide with strong deformation retracts.
Definition 4.6. Let (X, A) be a pair of finite T0 -spaces, i.e. A is a subspace of a finite
T0 -space X. We say that (X, A) is a minimal pair if all the beat points of X lie in A.
Proposition 4.7. Let (X, A) be a minimal pair and let f : X → X be a map such that
f ≃ 1X rel A. Then f = 1X .
Proof. Suppose that f ≤ 1X and f |A = 1A . Let x ∈ X. If x ∈ X is minimal, f (x) = x. In
general, suppose we have proved that f |Ûx = 1|Ûx . If x ∈ A, f (x) = x. If x ∈
                                                                                / A, x is not a
down beat point of X. However y < x implies y = f (y) ≤ f (x) ≤ x. Therefore f (x) = x.
The case f ≥ 1X is similar, and the general case follows from 4.1.                           

  Note that Theorem 4.4 follows from Proposition 4.7 taking A = ∅.
Corollary 4.8. Let (X, A) and (Y, B) be minimal pairs and let f : X → Y , g : Y → X
be such that gf ≃ 1X rel A, gf ≃ 1Y rel B. Then f and g are homeomorphisms.
Corollary 4.9. Let X be a finite T0 -space and let A ⊆ X. Then, X ց
                                                                  ց A if and only if
A is a strong deformation retract of X.
Proof. We only have to prove that if A ⊆ X is a strong deformation retract, then X ցց A.
To this end, perform arbitrary elementary strong collapses removing beat points which
are not in A. Suppose X ց    ց Y ⊇ A and that all the beat points of Y lie in A. Then
(Y, A) is a minimal pair. Since A and Y are strong deformation retracts of X, the minimal
pairs (A, A) and (Y, A) satisfy the hypothesis of Corollary 4.8. Therefore A and Y are
homeomorphic and so, X ց    ց Y = A.                                                   

  It follows that A ⊆ X is a core of X if and only if it is a minimal finite space such that
X ցց A.

   The relationship between finite spaces and simplicial complexes is the following. Given
a finite simplicial complex K, we define the associated finite space (face poset) X (K) as
the poset of simplices of K ordered by inclusion. McCord proved that |K| and X (K)
have the same weak homotopy type [19]. In particular, they have the same homotopy
and homology groups, however in general they are not homotopy equivalent. Conversely,
if X is a finite T0 -space, the associated simplicial complex (order complex ) K(X) has as
simplices the non-empty chains of X and it also has the same weak homotopy type as
X. These constructions are functorial: a simplicial map ϕ : K → L induces an order
preserving map X (ϕ) : X (K) → X (L) given by X (ϕ)(σ) = ϕ(σ) and a continuous map
f : X → Y between finite T0 -spaces induces a simplicial map K(f ) : K(X) → K(Y ) defined
by K(f )(x) = f (x).
Lemma 4.10. Let f, g : X → Y be two homotopic maps between finite T0 -spaces. Then
there exists a sequence f = f0 , f1 , . . . , fn = g such that for every 0 ≤ i < n there is a point
xi ∈ X with the following properties:
   1. fi and fi+1 coincide in X r {xi }, and
   2. fi (xi ) covers or is covered by fi+1 (xi ).
12                               J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that f = f0 ≤ g by Proposition 4.1.
Let A = {x ∈ X | f (x) 6= g(x)}. If A = ∅, f = g and there is nothing to prove. Suppose
A 6= ∅ and let x = x0 be a maximal point of A. Let y ∈ Y be such that y covers f (x)
and y ≤ g(x) and define f1 : X → Y by f1 |Xr{x} = f |Xr{x} and f1 (x) = y. Then f1 is
continuous for if x′ > x, x′ ∈
                             / A and therefore
                          f1 (x′ ) = f (x′ ) = g(x′ ) ≥ g(x) ≥ y = f1 (x).
  Repeating this construction for fi and g, we define fi+1 . By finiteness of X and Y this
process ends.                                                                           

Proposition 4.11. Let f, g : X → Y be two homotopic maps between finite T0 -spaces.
Then the simplicial maps K(f ), K(g) : K(X) → K(Y ) lie in the same contiguity class.

Proof. By the previous lemma, we can assume that there exists x ∈ X such that f (y) =
g(y) for every y 6= x and f (x) is covered by g(x). Therefore, if C is a chain in X,
f (C) ∪ g(C) is a chain in Y . In other words, if σ ∈ K(X) is a simplex, K(f )(σ) ∪ K(g)(σ)
is a simplex in K(Y ).                                                                   

Proposition 4.12. Let ϕ, ψ : K → L be simplicial maps which lie in the same contiguity
class. Then X (ϕ) ≃ X (ψ).

Proof. Assume that ϕ and ψ are contiguous. Then the map f : X (K) → X (L), defined
by f (σ) = ϕ(σ) ∪ ψ(σ) is well-defined and continuous. Moreover X (ϕ) ≤ f ≥ X (ψ), and
then X (ϕ) ≃ X (ψ).                                                                  

   Now we will study the relationship between strong homotopy types of simplicial com-
plexes and homotopy types of finite spaces. The following result is a direct consequence
of Propositions 4.11 and 4.12.

Theorem 4.13.
      (a) If two finite T0 -spaces are homotopy equivalent, their associated complexes have
          the same strong homotopy type.
      (b) If two complexes have the same strong homotopy type, the associated finite spaces
          are homotopy equivalent.

     In fact, we can give a more precise result:

Theorem 4.14.
      (a) Let X be a finite T0 -space and let Y ⊆ X. If X ց
                                                          ց Y , then K(X) ց
                                                                          ց K(Y ).
      (b) Let K be a complex and let L ⊆ K. If K ց   ց L, then X (K) ց
                                                                     ց X (K).

Proof. If x ∈ X is a beat point, there exists a point x′ ∈ Ĉx which is comparable with all the
other points of Ĉx . Then lkK(X) (x) is a simplicial cone. Therefore, K(X) ց  ց K(X) r x =
K(X r {x}).
   If K is a complex and v ∈ K is such that lk(v) = aL is a simplicial cone, we define
r : X (K) → X (K r v) as follows:
                                        
                                           aσ r {v} if v ∈ σ
                               r(σ) =
                                           σ           if v ∈
                                                            /σ
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                13


Clearly r is a well defined order preserving map. Denote i : X (K r v) ֒→ X (K) the
inclusion and define f : X (K) → X (K),
                                        
                                           aσ if v ∈ σ
                                f (σ) =
                                           σ if v ∈/σ
Then ir ≤ f ≥ 1X (K) and both ir and f are the identity on X (K r v). Therefore
ir ≃ 1X (K) rel X (K r v) and then X (K) ց
                                         ց X (K r v) by Corollary 4.9.       

  Notice that the barycentric subdivision of a complex K coincides with K ′ = K(X (K)).
The barycentric subdivision of a finite T0 -space X is defined as X ′ = X (K(X)).
Theorem 4.15. Let K be a complex. Then K is strong collapsible if and only if K ′ is
strong collapsible.
Proof. If K ց   ց ∗, then X (K) ց       ց ∗ and K ′ = K(X (K)) ց   ց ∗ by Theorem 4.14. Sup-
pose now that K is such that K ′ ց          ց ∗. Let L be a core of K. Then K ց       ց L and
by Theorem 4.14, K ց       ′        ′                                ′
                               ց L . Therefore L is minimal and L is strong collapsible. Let
L0 = L′ , L1 , L2 , ..., Ln = ∗ be a sequence of subcomplexes of L′ such that there is an ele-
mentary strong collapse from Li to Li+1 for every 0 ≤ i < n. We will prove by induction in
i that all the barycenters of the 0-simplices and of the maximal simplices of L are vertices
of Li ⊆ L′ .
   Let σ = {v0 , v1 , . . . , vk } be a maximal simplex of L. By induction, the barycenter σ̂ of
σ is a vertex of Li . We claim that lkLi (σ̂) is not a cone. If σ is a 0-simplex, that link
is empty, so we assume σ has positive dimension. Since v̂j σ̂ is a simplex of L′ , v̂j ∈ Li
by induction and Li is a full subcomplex of L′ , then v̂j ∈ lkLi (σ̂) for every 0 ≤ j ≤ k.
Suppose lkLi (σ̂) is a cone. In particular, there exists σ ′ ∈ L such that σ̂ ′ ∈ lkLi (σ̂) and
moreover σ̂ ′ v̂j ∈ lkLi (σ̂) for every j. Since σ is a maximal simplex, σ ′ ( σ and vj ∈ σ ′ for
every j. Then σ ⊆ σ ′ , which is a contradiction. Hence, σ̂ is not a dominated vertex of Li
and therefore, σ̂ ∈ Li+1 .
   Let v ∈ L be a vertex. By induction, v̂ ∈ Li . As above, if v is a maximal simplex
of L, lkLi (v̂) = ∅. Suppose v is not a maximal simplex of L. Let σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σk be the
maximal simplices of L which contain v. By induction σ̂j ∈ Li for every 0 ≤ j ≤ k, and
since Li ⊆ L′ is full, σ̂j ∈ lkLi (v̂). Suppose that lkLi (v̂) is cone. Then there exists σ ∈ L
such that σ̂ ∈ lkLi (v̂) and moreover, σ̂σ̂j ∈ lkLi (v̂) for every j. In particular, v ( σ and
σ ⊆ σj for every j. Let v ′ ∈ σ, v ′ 6= v. Then v ′ is contained in every maximal simplex
which contains v. This contradicts the minimality of L. Therefore v̂ is not dominated in
Li , which proves that v̂ ∈ Li+1 .
   Finally, Ln = ∗ contains all the barycenters of the vertices of L. Thus, L = ∗ and K is
strong collapsible.
                                                                                               
  We will prove a finite-space version of Theorem 4.15. In general, X and X ′ do not have
the same homotopy type. However, we will show that X is contractible if and only if its
barycentric subdivision X ′ is contractible. The first implication follows immediately from
Theorem 4.14. For the converse, we need some previous results.
Lemma 4.16. Let X be a finite T0 -space. Then X is a minimal finite space if and only
if there are no x, y ∈ X with x 6= y such that if z ∈ X is comparable with x, then so is it
with y.
14                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


Proof. If X is not minimal, there exists a beat point x. Without loss of generality assume
that x is a down beat point. Let y be the maximum of Ûx . Then if z ≥ x, z ≥ y and if
z < x, z ≤ y.
   Conversely, suppose that there exists x and y as in the statement. In particular x is
comparable with y. We may assume that x > y. Let A = {z ∈ X | z > y and Cz ⊆ Cy }.
This set is non-empty since x ∈ A. Let x′ be a minimal element of A. We show that x′
is a down beat point with y = max(Ûx′ ). Let z < x′ , then z is comparable with y since
x′ ∈ A. Suppose z > y. Let w ∈ X. If w ≤ z, then w ≤ x′ and so, w ∈ Cy . If w ≥ z,
w ≥ y. Therefore z ∈ A, contradicting the minimality of x′ . Then z ≤ y. Therefore y is
the maximum of Ûx′ .                                                                    
Proposition 4.17. Let X be a finite T0 -space. Then X is a minimal finite space if and
only if K(X) is a minimal complex.
Proof. If X is not minimal, it has a beat point x and then K(X) ց   ց K(X r {x}) by
Theorem 4.14. Therefore K(X) is not minimal.
   Conversely, suppose K(X) is not minimal. Then it has a dominated vertex x. Suppose
lk(x) = x′ L for some x′ ∈ X, L ⊆ K(X). In particular, if y ∈ X is comparable with x,
y ∈ lk(x) and then yx′ ∈ lk(x). Thus, any point comparable with x is also comparable
with x′ . By Lemma 4.16, X is not minimal.                                         
Corollary 4.18. Let X be a finite T0 -space. Then X is contractible if and only if X ′ is
contractible.
Proof. If X is contractible, X ց ց ∗, then K(X) ց       ց ∗ by Theorem 4.14 and therefore
  ′
X = X (K(X)) ց                                  ′
                 ց ∗. Now suppose that X is contractible. Let Y ⊆ X be a core of X.
Then by Theorem 4.14 X ′ ց   ց Y ′ . If X ′ is contractible, so is Y ′ . Again by Theorem 4.14,
    ′          ′
K(Y ) = K(Y ) is strong collapsible. By Theorem 4.15, K(Y ) is strong collapsible. By
Proposition 4.17, K(Y ) is a minimal complex and therefore K(Y ) = ∗. Then Y is just a
point, so X is contractible.                                                                 
   There is an alternative proof of Corollary 4.18 which does not make use of Theorem
4.15. It can be obtained from the following result, which is the converse of Theorem 4.13
(b).
Theorem 4.19. Let K and L be two simplicial complexes. If X (K) and X (L) are homo-
topy equivalent, then K and L have the same strong homotopy type.
Proof. Let f : X (K) → X (L) be a homotopy equivalence. We may assume that f sends
minimal points to minimal points since in other case, it is possible to replace f by a map
fb which sends a minimal element x of X (K) to a minimal element y ≤ f (x) of X (L). This
new map fb is also order-preserving and since fb ≤ f , it is also a homotopy equivalence.
   The map f induces a vertex map F : K → L defined by F (v) = w if f ({v}) = {w}.
Moreover F is simplicial for if σ = {v0 , v1 , . . . , vn } is a simplex of K, then σ ≥ {vi } in
X (K) for every i and then f (σ) ≥ f ({vi }) in X (L). Thus, F (vi ) is contained in the
simplex f (σ) for every i, which means that F (σ) is a simplex of L.
   Let g : X (L) → X (K) be a homotopy inverse of f . We may also assume that g
sends minimal elements to minimal elements and therefore it induces a simplicial map
G : L → K. We show that GF ∼ 1K and F G ∼ 1L .
   Since gf ≃ 1X (K) , there exists a sequence of maps hi : X (K) → X (K) such that
                             gf = h0 ≤ h1 ≥ . . . ≤ h2k = 1X (K) .
                       STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                        15


  Once again we can assume that the maps h2i send minimal elements to minimal elements
and induce simplicial maps H2i : K → K. The maps H2i and H2i+2 are contiguous, for if
σ = {v0 , v1 , . . . , vn }, then
                                    h2i ({vj }) ≤ h2i (σ) ≤ h2i+1 (σ),
and then H2i (vj ) ∈ h2i+1 (σ) for every j. Therefore H2i (σ) ⊆ h2i+1 (σ). Analogously
H2i+2 (σ) ⊆ h2i+1 (σ) and then H2i (σ) ∪ H2i+2 (σ) is a simplex of K. Hence, GF = H0 lies
in the same contiguity class as H2k = 1K . Symmetrically F G ∼ 1L and by Corollary 2.12,
K and L have the same strong homotopy type.                                            
   The alternative proof of Corollary 4.18 mentioned above is as follows. Suppose X is
a finite T0 -space such that X ′ is contractible. Let Y be a core of X. Then X (K(Y )) =
Y ′ ≃ X ′ is also contractible and by Theorem 4.19, K(Y ) has the strong homotopy type of
a point. However, by Proposition 4.17, K(Y ) is minimal, and then K(Y ) is a point, which
proves that the core Y of X is a point.

                         5. From strong collapses to evasiveness
   The theory of strong homotopy types has been shown to be much easier to handle
than the classical simple homotopy theory. In order to understand the difference between
simplicial collapses and strong collapses or, more specifically, to investigate how far is a
simplicial collapse from being a strong collapse, one can relax the notion of strong collapse
and define inductively different notions of collapses which lie between both concepts. In
this section we will compare the various notions of collapses of complexes and use the
theory of finite topological spaces to improve some known results on collapsibility and
non-evasiveness.
   The notion of non-evasiveness arises from problems of graph theory and extends then to
combinatorics and combinatorial geometry [4, 12, 13, 15, 24]. We will see that this concept
appears naturally in our context. Our approach differs slightly from previous treatments
of this subject. As we have already mentioned, we are more interested in understanding
the difference between the distinct notions of collapses from a geometric viewpoint. As a
consequence of our results, we obtain a stronger version of a known result of V. Welker
concerning the barycentric subdivisions of collapsible complexes [24].
Definition 5.1. A strong collapse K ց      ց L will be also called a 0-collapse and will be
denoted by K ց0 L. A complex K is 0-collapsible if K 0-collapses to a point (i.e. if it is
strong collapsible). We will say that there is a 1-collapse K ց1 L from K to L if we can
remove vertices one by one in such a way that their links are 0-collapsible complexes. A
complex is 1-collapsible if it 1-collapses to a point. In general, there is an (n + 1)-collapse
K ցn+1 L if there exists a sequence of deletions of vertices whose links are n-collapsible.
A complex is (n + 1)-collapsible if it (n + 1)-collapses to a point.
   Since simplicial cones are strong collapsible, if follows that n-collapsible complexes are
(n + 1)-collapsible. In fact, this implication is strict for every n. Example 2.13 shows a
1-collapsible complex which is not 0-collapsible. This example can be easily generalized
to higher dimensions.
Example 5.2. Denote by S 0 the discrete complex with two vertices and consider the
simplicial join (S 0 )∗4 = S 0 ∗S 0 ∗S 0 ∗S 0 with vertices a, a′ , b, b′ , c, c′ , d, d′ and whose simplices
are the sets of vertices which do not have a repeated letter. Let K be the complex obtained
16                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


from that space when removing the maximal simplex {a, b, c, d} (See Figure 6). The links
of the points a, b, c and d are isomorphic to the complex of Example 2.13. The links of the
othe points are spheres isomorphic to (S 0 )∗3 = S 0 ∗ S 0 ∗ S 0 . Then K is not 1-collapsible.
However its easy to see that K is 2-collapsible. In general, it can be proved that (S 0 )∗n
minus a maximal simplex is (n − 2)-collapsible but not (n − 3)-collapsible.

                                         a




                                             c´
                                                       b´            d
                                        d´
                                                  a´
                       b




                                                            c

         Figure 6. A 2-collapsible simplicial complex which is not 1-collapsible.


Definition 5.3. A simplicial complex is said to be non-evasive if it is n-collapsible for
some n ≥ 0. If a complex is not non-evasive, it will be called evasive.
   The minimum number n such that K is n-collapsible measures how far is the non-
evasive complex K from being strong collapsible. Note that this definition of non-evasive
coincides with the usual definition, which is as follows: K is non-evasive if it has only one
vertex or if inductively there exists a vertex v ∈ K such that both K r v and lk(v) are
non-evasive (cf. [4, 13]).
   Note that the notions of non-evasiveness and n-collapsibility coincide in complexes of
dimension less than or equal to n + 1.
   If K is a complex and v ∈ K is such that lk(v) is non-evasive, we say that there is an
elementary NE-collapse from K to K r v. We say that there is an NE-collapse (or an
NE-reduction) K ցN E L from a complex K to a subcomplex L if there exists a sequence
of elementary NE-collapses from K to L. It is easy to prove by induction that non-evasive
complexes are collapsible. The converse is not true as the following example shows.
Example 5.4. The 2-homogeneous complex of Figure 7 is a slight modification of one
defined by Hachimori (see [11, Section 5.4]). The face {1, 3} is free and it is easy to see
that the complex is collapsible. However, the links of the vertices are graphs which are
not trees. Thus it is evasive.
Definition 5.5. A finite T0 -space X is non-evasive if it is a point or inductively if there
exists x ∈ X such that both its link Ĉx and X r {x} are non-evasive.
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                             17


                                 3            2             1




                                              6

                                2                           2
                                        5           7


                                              4


                                 1                          3


                        Figure 7. A collapsible evasive complex.

   If x is a point of a finite T0 -space X such that Ĉx is non-evasive, we say that there is
an elementary NE-collapse from X to X r {x}. There is an NE-collapse from X to a
subspace Y if there exists a sequence of elementary NE-collapses from X to Y . We denote
this by X ցN E Y .
  Recall from [2] and [3] that a weak point of a finite T0 -space X is a point x ∈ X such
that Ĉx is contractible. We say that there is a collapse X ց Y if the subspace Y can be
obtained from X by removing weak points one by one. Beat points are particular cases of
weak points.
Remark 5.6. If X is a finite T0 -space such that there is a point x ∈ X with Cx = X, it
can be proved by induction that X is non-evasive. The link of a beat point satisfies this
property and therefore, strong collapses of finite spaces are NE-collapses and contractible
spaces are non-evasive. Since the links of weak points are contractible, collapses are NE-
collapses and collapsible spaces are non-evasive.
   Although it seems awkward, for complexes we have that a NE-collapse K ցN E L is a
collapse K ց L, but for finite spaces the implication is in the opposite direction: a collapse
X ց Y is a NE-collapse X ցN E Y . However, the following results will show that the
notion of NE-collapse for finite spaces corresponds exactly to the notion of NE-collapse of
simplicial complexes. These results extend our previous results of [2] on simple homotopy
types.
Theorem 5.7. Let X and Y be finite T0 -spaces. If X ցN E Y , then K(X) ցN E K(Y ).
Proof. We prove the result by induction in the number of points of X. It suffices to
corroborate it for elementary NE-collapses. Let x ∈ X be such that Ĉx is non-evasive.
Then Ĉx ցN E ∗ and by induction lkK(X) (x) = K(Ĉx ) ցN E ∗, i.e. lkK(X) (x) is non-
evasive. Therefore K(X) ցN E K(X) r x = K(X r {x}).                                 
  In particular one deduces the analogous version for (usual) collapses proved in [2]. For
the sake of completeness we include the proof of the following result from [2].
Theorem 5.8. If a complex K collapses to a subcomplex L, then X (K) ց X (L).
Proof. We may assume there is an elementary collapse K ց L of a free face σ of a simplex
aσ. Then σ ∈ X (K) is covered only by aσ. Therefore σ is a beat point and in particular
18                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


X (K) ց X (K) r {σ}. Now, the link of aσ in X (K) r {σ} is X (aσ̇) which is contractible
by Theorem 4.14 since the cone aσ̇ is strong collapsible. Then, aσ is a weak point of
X (K) r {σ} which proves that X (K) r {σ} ց X (L).                                    
     In particular we deduce the following
Corollary 5.9. If K ցN E L is a NE-collapse of complexes, then X (K) ցN E X (L).
Theorem 5.10. Let Y be a subspace of a finite T0 -space X. Then, X ց Y if and only if
K(X) ց1 K(Y ). In particular X is collapsible if and only if K(X) is 1-collapsible.
Proof. Since K(X) r x = K(X r {x}), it suffices to analize the case that Y = X r {x}
for some x ∈ X. There is a collapse from X to X r {x} if and only if x ∈ X is a
weak point, or in other words if Ĉx is contractible. But if Ĉx is contractible, then by
Theorem 4.14, lkK(X) (x) = K(Ĉx ) is strong collapsible. Conversely, if lkK(X) (x) = K(Ĉx )
is strong collapsible, (Ĉx )′ is contractible by Theorem 4.14 and then x ∈ X is a weak
point by Theorem 4.18. Finally, the link of x in K(X) is strong collapsible if and only if
K(X) ց1 K(X r {x}).                                                                       
     We can now derive the most important result of this section:
Corollary 5.11. If a complex K collapses to a subcomplex L, then K ′ ց1 L′ . In particular
if K is collapsible, K ′ is 1-collapsible.
Proof. If K ց L, then by Theorem 5.8 X (K) ց X (L) and by Theorem 5.10, K ′ =
K(X (K)) ց1 K(X (L)) = L′ .                                                 
   In view of this result, it is equivalent to say that a compact polyhedron has a collapsible
triangulation and that it has a 1-collapsible triangulation. This equivalence could be
helpful when studying problems of collapsibility, such as Zeeman’s conjecture.
   In particular one can deduce Welker’s result [24, Thm. 2.10].
Corollary 5.12 (Welker). Let K be a collapsible complex. Then the barycentric subdivi-
sion K ′ is non-evasive.
Remark 5.13. It is unknown whether the converse of Corollary 5.12 holds. However if K ′ is
not just non-evasive but strong collapsible, then by Theorem 4.15, K is strong collapsible
and in particular collapsible.
   The proof of the fact that if K is collapsible then K ′ is 1-collapsible was made in two
steps: K ց ∗ ⇒ X (K) ց ∗ ⇒ K ′ = K(X (K)) ց1 ∗. In order to prove the converse, one
could try to prove the converses of both implications. In fact, the second implication is
an equivalence X (K) ց ∗ ⇔ K ′ ց1 ∗, by Theorem 5.10.
   Of course, there is an analogous of Corollary 5.12 for finite spaces. If X is a non-
evasive finite space, K(X) is non-evasive and then X ′ is collapsible. If the converse of this
statement is true, then any barycentric subdivision K ′ which is collapsible, would also be
non-evasive, and therefore the converse of 5.12 would be false.

                          6. Vertex-homogeneous complexes
   A complex K is said to be vertex-homogeneous if the group of simplicial automorphisms
Aut(K) acts transitively on the vertices of K. In other words, K is vertex-homogeneous
if for any two vertices v, w ∈ K, there exists an automorphism ϕ : K → K such that
                    STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                             19


ϕ(v) = w. For instance, the simplices are vertex-homogeneous simplicial complexes. There
exist examples of contractible (even collapsible) vertex-homogeneous complexes which are
not simplices (see [12, 14]). The Evasiveness conjecture for simplicial complexes states
that a non-evasive vertex-homogeneous simplicial complex is a simplex. This has been
verified for complexes with a prime-power number of vertices, but the general question
remains open.
   In this section we will prove that the conjecture holds if the complex is strong col-
lapsible (Corollary 6.4). We will also prove that if K is vertex-homogeneous, its core is
vertex-homogeneous and it is isomorphic to N 2 (K). Moreover, we will see that vertex-
homogeneous complexes are isomorphic to an n-th multiple of their cores. From these
results we will deduce that any vertex-homogeneous complex with a prime number of ver-
tices is minimal or a simplex. Finally, we use the notions of collapses introduced in the
previous section to prove that the core of a vertex-homogeneous non-evasive complex is
also non-evasive. This result implies that the study of the Evasiveness conjecture can be
reduced to the class of minimal complexes.
   If ϕ : K → K is a simplicial automorphism of a contractible complex K, there is a
point of |K| which is fixed by |ϕ|. In fact, every continuous map f : |K| → |K| has
a fixed point by the Lefschetz fixed-point theorem [21]. The problem becomes harder
when one studies fixed points of an automorhism group instead of a single automorphism.
There exist examples of fixed point free actions of finite groups over compact contractible
polyhedra [7]. Furthermore, R. Oliver [20] characterized the groups G for which every
simplicial action of G over a finite contractible complex has a fixed point.
   From a different perspective, we use a result of Stong [23], to prove that if K is a strong
collapsible complex, then every simplicial action on K has a fixed point.

Theorem 6.1 (Stong). If X is a contractible finite T0 -space, there is a point x ∈ X fixed
by every homeomorphism of X.

Theorem 6.2. Let K be a strong collapsible complex and let G be a group of simplicial
automorphisms of K. Then there exists a point x ∈ |K| such that |ϕ|(x) = x for every
ϕ ∈ G.

Proof. The action of G on K induces an action of G on the contractible space X (K). By
Theorem 6.1 there exists a point σ ∈ X (K) which is fixed by the action of G. Therefore,
the simplex σ is fixed by the automorphisms of G and then, the barycenter of σ is a fixed
point by the action.                                                                    

Remark 6.3. The fact of being the group of automorphisms of a strong collapsible complex
does not impose any restriction on the group. In other words, every finite group is the
automorphism group of some strong collapsible complex. Given a finite group G, there
exists a complex K such that Aut(K) ≃ G (see [8]). If K is not a cone, then the simplicial
cone aK with base K is a strong collapsible complex with automorphism group isomorphic
to G.

   From Theorem 6.2, we deduce that the Evasiveness conjecture is true for strong col-
lapsible simplicial complexes.

Corollary 6.4. Let K be a strong collapsible vertex-homogeneous complex. Then K is a
simplex.
20                              J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


Proof. By Theorem 6.2 there exists a point x ∈ |K| fixed by Aut(K). Therefore, the
support of x is a fixed simplex, and since K is vertex-homogeneous, this simplex must
contain all the vertices of K.                                                     
   We will see another proof of this result as an application of the study of the square-nerve
N 2 (K) of a vertex-homogeneous complex K.
   Let K be a complex and v, w vertices of K. We denote v ≺ w if every maximal simplex
of K which contains v, also contains w. In other words, v ≺ w if v is dominated by w or
if v = w. Clearly ≺ is a preorder on the set of vertices of K.
Remark 6.5. Let v, w be vertices of a complex K and let ϕ ∈ Aut(K). If v ≺ w, ϕ(v) ≺
ϕ(w). This follows immediately from the fact that ϕ induces a correspondence between
maximal simplices containing v and maximal simplices containing ϕ(v).
Proposition 6.6. If K is vertex-homogeneous, ≺ is an equivalence relation and all the
equivalence classes have the same cardinality.
Proof. Suppose v ≺ w. Let ϕ ∈ Aut(K) such that ϕ(v) = w. By Remark 6.5,
                                  v ≺ ϕ(v) ≺ ϕ2 (v) ≺ . . . .
Since K is finite and ϕ is one-to-one on vertices, there exists n ≥ 1 such that ϕn (v) = v.
Then, w = ϕ(v) ≺ ϕn (v) = v. Thus, ≺ is symmetric and then an equivalence.
   For the second part, suppose [v] is the equivalence class of a vertex v and [v ′ ] is the
class of another vertex v ′ . Let ψ be an automorphism such that ψ(v) = v ′ . By Remark
6.5, ψ induces a well defined map from [v] to [v ′ ] and ψ −1 a map [v ′ ] 7→ [v]. These are
mutually inverse, and then [v] and [v ′ ] have the same cardinality.                      
Remark 6.7. If K is vertex-homogeneous, N 2 (K) is isomorphic to any full subcomplex of
K spanned by a set of vertices constituted by one element of each class of ≺. By the proof
of Proposition 3.4, N 2 (K) is isomorphic to any full subcomplex of K spanned by a set of
                   T
                   r
vertices, one v ∈    σi for each maximal intersecting family {σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σr } of maximal
                  i=0
                                                                      T
                                                                      r
simplices of K. On the other hand, each one of the intersections            σi is an equivalence
                                                                      i=0
class of ≺ and viceversa.
Theorem 6.8. Let K be a vertex-homogeneous complex. Then, the core of K is vertex-
homogeneous and it is isomorphic to N 2 (K).
Proof. Let L be a full subcomplex of K with one vertex in each equivalence class of ≺.
Since K ց  ց L and L is isomorphic to N 2 (K), we only need to prove that L is minimal.
First we claim that if σ is a maximal simplex of K, σ ∩ L is a maximal simplex of L.
    Let τ be a simplex of L containing σ ∩L and let ν be a maximal simplex of K containing
τ . Let v ∈ σ. Then there exists v ′ ∈ L with v ≺ v ′ . Since v ∈ σ, then v ′ ∈ σ and therefore
v ′ ∈ σ ∩ L ⊆ ν. Since ν is maximal in K and v ′ ≺ v, v ∈ ν. This proves that σ ⊆ ν and
by the maximality of σ, σ = ν. Thus, τ ⊆ σ and then τ = τ ∩ L ⊆ σ ∩ L. This proves
that σ ∩ L is maximal in L.
    Now, suppose that v and w are two vertices of L and that v ≺ w in L. Let σ be
a maximal simplex of K which contains v. Then σ ∩ L is maximal in L and therefore
w ∈ σ ∩ L ⊆ σ. Therefore v ≺ w in K and since both vertices lie in L, v = w. Hence, L
has no dominated vertices, which says that it is minimal.
                      STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                    21


   It only remains to prove the vertex-homogeneity of N 2 (K). An automorphism ϕ :
K → K induces an automorphism ϕ : N 2 (K) → N 2 (K). If {σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σr } is a maximal
intersecting family of maximal simplices of K, so is {ϕ(σ0 ), ϕ(σ1 ), . . . , ϕ(σr )}. This defines
a vertex map ϕ : N 2 (K) → N 2 (K) which is clearly simplicial with inverse ϕ−1 .
   Suppose Σ1 = {σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σr } and Σ2 = {τ0 , τ1 , . . . , τs } are two maximal intersecting
                                                  Tr                  Ts
families of maximal simplices of K. Take v ∈           σi , w ∈          τi and an automorphism ϕ of
                                                     i=0          i=0
K such that ϕ(v) = w. Then ϕ(Σ1 ) = Σ2 , so N 2 (K) is vertex-homogeneous.                           
   The fact that the square nerve preserves vertex-homogeneity can also be deduced im-
mediately from [14, Lemma 10].
   We adopt Lutz’s terminology [14] and call the n-th multiple of a complex K the complex
nK whose vertex set is VK ×{1, 2, . . . , n} and whose simplices are the sets whose projections
to VK are simplices of K. In other words, nK is the simplicial product of K with an
(n − 1)-simplex. Notice that if K is vertex-homogeneous, so is nK for every n ≥ 1.
Proposition 6.9. Let K be a vertex-homogeneous complex. Then, there exists n ≥ 1 such
that K is isomorphic to the n-th multiple of its core.
Proof. Let L be a full subcomplex of K containing one vertex of each equivalence class
of ≺ and let n be the number of elements of each class. For every v ∈ L, let ϕv : [v] →
{v} × {1, 2, . . . , n} be a bijection. We claim that the vertex bijective map ϕ : VK → VnL
induced by the maps ϕv is a simplicial isomorphism between K and nL.
   Let p : nL → L be the canonical projection. Let σ ∈ K. If τ is a maximal simplex of
K which contains σ and v ∈ p(ϕ(σ)), there exists v ′ ∈ [v] such that v ′ ∈ σ. Since v ′ ≺ v,
v ∈ τ . Therefore, p(ϕ(σ)) ⊆ τ is a simplex, which proves that ϕ is simplicial.
   Now if σ ∈ nL, p(σ) ∈ K. Let τ be a maximal simplex of K which contains p(σ).
If v ∈ ϕ−1 (σ), there exists v ′ ∈ [v] such that v ′ ∈ p(σ). Since v ′ ≺ v, v ∈ τ . Thus,
ϕ−1 (σ) ⊆ τ is a simplex of K and so, ϕ−1 is simplicial.
   Since L is isomorphic to the core of K by Theorem 6.8 and Remark 6.7, the result is
proved.                                                                                   
  From this result we obtain an alternative proof of Corollary 6.4. If K is vertex-
homogeneous and strong collapsible, the core N 2 (K) is a point. The n-th multiple of
a point is a simplex.
Corollary 6.10. If a vertex-homogeneous complex K has a prime number of vertices,
then it is minimal or it is a simplex.
Definition 6.11. Let K be a complex with vertex set VK and let F : VK → N be a
function. We define the complex FK whose vertices are the pairs (v, i) with v ∈ VK and
1 ≤ i ≤ F(v) and whose simplices are the sets {(v0 , i0 ), (v1 , i1 ), . . . , (vr , ir )} such that the
projections {v0 , v1 , . . . , vr } are simplices of K.
  This generalizes the notion of n-multiple of K which coincides with FK when F is the
constant map n.
Theorem 6.12. Let K be a simplicial complex, F : VK → N and n ≥ 0. If FK is
n-collapsible, then K is n-collapsible. In particular if FK is non-evasive, so is K.
Proof. The proof is by induction in n. The full subcomplex L of FK spanned by the
vertices of the form (v, 1) with v ∈ VK is isomorphic to K. Moreover, every vertex (v, i) of
22                                     J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


FK with i ≥ 2 is dominated by the vertex (v, 1) of L. By Lemma 3.3, FK ց    ց L. Thus,
if FK is strong collapsible, so is K. This proves the case n = 0.
   Now assume that FK is (n + 1)-collapsible. Then there exists an ordering
                                         (v0 , i0 ), (v1 , i1 ), . . . (vr , ir )
of the vertices of FK such that lkLs ((vs , is )) is n-collapsible for 0 ≤ s < r, where L0 = FK
and Ls+1 = Ls r (vs , is ).
    For each v ∈ K consider the number lv = max{j | vj = v}. Let w0 , w1 , . . . , wk be the
ordering of the vertices of K such that lw0 < lw1 < . . . < lwk . We claim that it is possible
to make the deletions of the vertices of K in that order to show that K ցn+1 wk .
    Define K0 = K and Kq+1 = Kq r wq for 0 ≤ q < k. We have to show that lkKq (wq ) is
n-collapsible for every 0 ≤ q < k. We already know that lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) is n-collapsible,
so, by induction it suffices to prove that lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) is isomorphic to F ′ lkKq (wq ) for
some F ′ : VlkKq (wq ) → N.
    The vertices of lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) are the vertices (u, i) of Llwq +1 such that {(u, i),
(wq , ilwq )} is a simplex of FK. By definition of lwq , if (u, i) ∈ Llwq +1 , then u = wp
for some p > q. Thus if (u, i) ∈ lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )), u ∈ lkKq (wq ). Conversely, if u ∈
lkKq (wq ), then u = wp for some p > q and then (u, ilu ) ∈ lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )). Moreover
(u, is ) ∈ lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) for every lwq < s ≤ r such that vs = u. .
    In general, a set of vertices {(u0 , i0 ), (u1 , i1 ), . . . , (ut , it )} of lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) is a simplex
if and only if {(u0 , i0 ), (u1 , i1 ), . . . , (ut , it ), (wq , ilwq )} is a simplex of FK or equivalently
if {u0 , u1 , . . . , ut } ∈ lkKq (wq ). Then lkLlwq ((wq , ilwq )) is isomorphic to F ′ lkKq (wq ) where
F ′ (u) is the cardinality of the set {s | lwq < s ≤ r and vs = u}.                                               
Corollary 6.13. The core of a vertex-homogeneous non-evasive complex is non-evasive.
Proof. Let K be a vertex-homogeneous complex and let L be its core. By Proposition 6.9,
K = nL fore some n. If K is non-evasive, then L is non-evasive by Theorem 6.12.      
  In general, the core of a non-evasive complex need not be non-evasive as the following
example shows.
Example 6.14. The finite space X whose Hasse diagram is as shown in Figure 8, is
collapsible and therefore K(X) is a 1-collapsible complex. In particular K(X) is non-
evasive. The point x ∈ X is a beat point and then K(X) ց     ց K(X r {x}). The space
X r {x} has no weak points (cf. [3]) and therefore K(X r {x}) has no vertices with strong
collapsible links by Theorem 5.10. In particular K(X r {x}) is the core of K(X) and it is
evasive because it is two-dimensional and not 1-collapsible.
  In view of Corollary 6.13 and Proposition 6.9, in order to prove the Evasiveness conjec-
ture for simplicial complexes it suffices to verify it for minimal complexes. In other words,
the following statement is equivalent to the Evasiveness conjecture.
Conjecture 6.15 (Evasiveness conjecture for minimal complexes). If K is a minimal,
vertex-homogeneous, non-evasive complex, then it is a point.
                       STRONG HOMOTOPY TYPES, NERVES AND COLLAPSES                                       23




                                                                       x




              Figure 8. A collapsible finite space with a non-collapsible core.


                                             References
 [1] J.A. Barmak. Algebraic topology of finite topological spaces and applications. PhD Thesis, Facultad de
     Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires (2009).
 [2] J.A. Barmak and E.G. Minian. Simple homotopy types and finite spaces. Adv. Math. 218 (2008), Issue
     1, 87-104.
 [3] J.A. Barmak and E.G. Minian. One-point reductions of finite spaces, h-regular CW-complexes and
     collapsibility. Algebr. Geom. Topol. 8 (2008), 1763-1780.
 [4] A. Björner. Topological methods. Handbook of Combinatorics, vol. 2 (1995), 1819-1872.
 [5] M.M. Cohen. A Course in Simple Homotopy Theory. Springer-Verlag New York, Heidelberg, Berlin
     (1970).
 [6] C.H. Dowker. Homology groups of relations. Ann. of Math. 56 (1952), 84-95.
 [7] E.E. Floyd and R.W. Richardson. An action of a finite group on an n-cell without stationary points.
     Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 65 (1959), 73-76.
 [8] R. Frucht. Herstellung von Graphen mit vorgegebener abstrakter Gruppe. Compositio Math. 6 (1939),
     239-250.
 [9] L. Glaser. Geometrical Combinatorial Topology- Volume I. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company (1970).
[10] B. Grünbaum. Nerves of simplicial complexes. Aequationes Math. 4 (1970), 63-73.
[11] M. Hachimori. Constructibility of Constructible Complexes PhD Thesis, Graduate School of Arts and
     Sciences, the University of Tokyo (2000).
[12] J.Kahn, M. Saks and D. Sturtevant. A topological approach to evasiveness. Combinatorica 4 (1984),
     297-306.
[13] D. Kozlov. Combinatorial algebraic topology. Springer-Verlag New York, Heidelberg, Berlin (2007).
[14] F.H. Lutz. Examples of Z-acyclic and contractible vertex-homogeneous simplicial complexes. Discrete
     Comput. Geom. 27 (2002), no. 1, 137-154.
[15] F.H. Lutz. Some results related to the evasiveness conjecture. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 81 (2001), no.
     1, 110-124.
[16] J.P.    May.      Finite   topological   spaces.    Notes     for   REU      (2003).    Available    at
     http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~ may/MISCMaster.html
[17] J.P. May. Finite spaces and simplicial complexes. Notes for REU (2003). Available at
     http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~ may/MISCMaster.html
[18] M.C. McCord. Homotopy type comparison of a space with complexes associated with its open covers.
     Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 18 (1967), 705-708.
[19] M.C. McCord. Singular homology groups and homotopy groups of finite topological spaces. Duke Math.
     J. 33 (1966), 465-474.
[20] R. Oliver. Fixed-point sets of group actions on finite acyclic complexes. Comm. Math. Helvetici 50
     (1975), 155-177.
[21] E. Spanier. Algebraic Topology. Springer (1966).
[22] R.E. Stong. Finite topological spaces. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 123 (1966), 325-340.
[23] R.E. Stong. Group actions on finite spaces. Discrete Math. 49 (1984), 95-100.
[24] V. Welker. Constructions preserving evasiveness and collapsibility. Discrete Math. 207 (1999), 243-255.
24                                J.A. BARMAK AND E.G. MINIAN


[25] J.H.C Whitehead. Simplicial spaces, nuclei and m-groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. 45 (1939), 243-
     327.
[26] E.C. Zeeman. On the dunce hat. Topology 2 (1964), 341-358.

  Departamento de Matemática, FCEyN, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Ar-
gentina
  E-mail address: jbarmak@dm.uba.ar
  E-mail address: gminian@dm.uba.ar
