fine new instrumentation relations. Note that subformulas of acycSame(v1 , v2 ), i.e.,
¬(cn0 (v1 ) ∧ cn0 (v2 )) ∧(n(v1 , v2 ) ⇔ n0 (v1 , v2 )) were not introduced. This is because
refinement was triggered by imprecise evaluation on a structure that had a single con-
crete individual in the panhandle. However, relation rev 3 is capable of maintaining the
key property of nodes in the panhandle with enough precision, so that another refine-
ment iteration is not required. Column 3 of Tab. 5 gives the definitions of the new
instrumentation relations after all occurrences of the defining formulas of new instru-
mentation relations in the query and in the definitions of other instrumentation relations
have been replaced with the use of the corresponding new instrumentation-relation sym-
bols. Again, only the query and new relations’ definitions are changed.


 Relation        Imprecise Subformula                                  Defining formula
                  same rn,x () ∧ same cn () ∧
 rev 1 ()                                                            same rn,x () ∧ same cn () ∧ rev 2 ()
                  ∀ v1 , v2 : cycRev (v1 , v2 ) ∨ acycSame(v1 , v2 )
 rev 2 ()         ∀ v1 , v2 : cycRev (v1 , v2 ) ∨ acycSame(v1 , v2 ) ∀ v1 : rev 3 (v1 )
 rev 3 (v1 )      ∀ v2 : cycRev (v1 , v2 ) ∨ acycSame(v1 , v2 )      ∀ v2 : rev 4 (v1 , v2 )
 rev 4 (v1 , v2 ) cycRev (v1 , v2 ) ∨ acycSame(v1 , v2 )             rev 5 (v1 , v2 ) ∨ acycSame(v1 , v2 )
 rev 5 (v1 , v2 ) cycRev (v1 , v2 )                                  (cn0 (v1 ) ∧ cn0 (v2 )) ∧ rev 6 (v2 , v1 )
 rev 6 (v1 , v2 ) n(v1 , v2 ) ⇔ n0 (v2 , v1 )                        rev 7 (v1 , v2 ) ∧ rev 8 (v2 , v1 )
 rev 7 (v1 , v2 ) n(v1 , v2 ) ⇒ n0 (v2 , v1 )                        n(v1 , v2 ) ⇒ n0 (v2 , v1 )
                   0
 rev 8 (v2 , v1 ) n (v2 , v1 ) ⇒ n(v1 , v2 )                         n0 (v2 , v1 ) ⇒ n(v1 , v2 )
Table 5. Instrumentation relations created by subformula-based refinement when the ap-
plication of Reverse is checked against the query expressed in Formula (9) on an
input abstraction of either type Panhandle or Cyclic. For compactness, we refer to
formula (cn0 (v1 ) ∧ cn0 (v2 )) ∧(n(v1 , v2 ) ⇔ n0 (v2 , v1 )) as cycRev (v1 , v2 ) and to formula
¬(cn0 (v1 ) ∧ cn0 (v2 )) ∧(n(v1 , v2 ) ⇔ n0 (v1 , v2 )) as acycSame(v1 , v2 ).



    After the introduction of the new instrumentation relations (Tab. 4 or 5, depend-
ing on the query being verified), the abstract interpretation of the DSC is performed
using an extended vocabulary that contains the new instrumentation-relation symbols.
The subsequent abstract interpretation of Reverse succeeds: in all of the structures
collected at the exit, rev1 () = 1.


Establishing that Reverse Terminates We can establish that Reverse terminates
using a few unary core relations and a simple progress monitor. We introduce a collec-
tion of unary core state relations, state 0 (v), state 1 (v), and state 2 (v).10 Every time the
reversal of the n pointer of the list node pointed to by y is completed (after line [8] of
Fig. 8), the node’s state is changed to the next state. (The state relations carry no seman-
tics with respect to the pointer values of nodes; they simply record the “visit counts” for
each node.) For each state relation s, we create a copy of s, which is used to save the
values of relation s at the start of the currently-processed loop iteration (after line [3]
of Fig. 8). We give the new relations the superscript lh to indicate that they hold the
10
     The state relations are not added to the set of abstraction relations, A.
loop-head values. The first abstract operation of each iteration of the loop takes a snap-
shot of the current states of nodes: state lh
                                           i (v) ← state i (v), for each i ∈ [0..2] and each
assignment of v to an individual in the abstract structure being processed. Additionally,
it asserts that x does not point to a list node in state 2 at the head of the loop (at that
point, x points to the node whose n edge is about to be reversed). The last operation of
every loop iteration performs a progress test by asserting the following formula:
                ∃ v : state lh                           lh
                                                                            
                             0 (v) ∧ state 1 (v) ∨ state 1 (v) ∧ state 2 (v)
                         ∀ v1 6= v : i∈[0..2] state lh
                      V              V                                       
                                                      i (v1 ) ⇔ state i (v1 )

The assertion ensures that one node’s state makes forward progress (the first line of
the assertion) and that no other node changes state (the second line of the assertion).
Together with the assertion that x does not point to a list node in state 2 at the start of
the loop, the above progress monitor establishes that each list node is visited at most
twice, thus establishing that the algorithm terminates.


7 Performance
The tables shown in Fig. 12 give execution times that were collected on a 3GHz Linux
PC. The rows indicate the type of data structures assumed as input, and the columns
indicate the query to be verified. In each case, one round of abstraction refinement
was required to obtain the definite answer 1 to the query. In other words, two rounds
of analysis were performed for both the DSC and Reverse: the first analysis round
of the DSC and Reverse used the initial abstraction (the core relations of Tab. 1,
core relation roc n , the instrumentation relations of Tab. 3, and the history relations
of §4), while the second round used the final abstraction, which additionally included
the relations of Tab. 4 or 5, depending on the query. For a given abstraction, the cost
of the DSC analysis is nearly identical for all input types because the general DSC
of Fig. 11(b) constructs an abstraction of all input types, from which structures that
represent the chosen input type are selected at the end using Formula (10), (11), or (12).
To gain a better understanding of the cost of verifying Reverse proper, the tables also
include the execution times for the last analysis round (using the final abstraction) of
Reverse, excluding the analysis time for the DSC.
    The tables of Fig. 12 show that the use of tree-shaped-sfe n maintenance in place
of acyclic-sfe n maintenance for maintaining the relation sfp n results in a reduction of
the total analysis time by a factor in the range of 2.8-4.8. The highest-cost analyses are
those that include type Panhandle as input. Using tree-shaped-sfe n maintenance, the
last iteration of the analysis of Reverse with the input abstraction of type Panhan-
dle/Cyclic takes approximately 2.5 minutes (the total execution time is approximately
4.5 minutes). The last iteration of the analysis of Reverse when the input abstraction
is of any other type takes under 13 seconds. The majority of the total analysis cost in
those cases is due to the use of the general DSC, which could be specialized to produce
input abstractions of type Acyclic or Cyclic more efficiently (e.g., using the DSC shown
in Fig. 11(a)).
    The two tables of Fig. 12 share many qualitative characteristics. Below we draw
some conclusions from Fig. 12(b), but all of the conclusions can be drawn from Fig. 12(a)
